T W O
Anarchy and
the Struggle for Power
G reat powers, I argue, are always searching for opportunities to
gain power over their rivals, with hegemony as their final goal.
This perspective does not allow for status quo powers, except for
the unusual state that achieves preponderance. Instead, the system is populated
with great powers that have revisionist intentions at their core . 1
This chapter presents a theory that explains this competition for power.
Specifically, I attempt to show that there is a compelling logic behind my
claim that great powers seek to maximize their share of world power. I do
not, however, test offensive realism against the historical record in this
chapter. That important task is reserved for later chapters.
W H Y S T AT E S P U R S U E P O W E R
My explanation for why great powers vie with each other for power
and strive for hegemony is derived from five assumptions about the
international system. None of these assumptions alone mandates that
states behave competitively. Taken together, however, they depict a world
in which states have considerable reason to think and sometimes behave
aggressively. In particular, the system encourages states to look for opportunities
to maximize their power vis-.3 -vis other states.
29
JO T H I T R A G E DY O F G R E A T P O W l l P O L I T I C S
How important i s i t that these assumptions b e realistic? Some social scientists
argue that the assumptions that underpin a theory need not conform
to reality. Indeed, the economist Milton Friedman maintains that the
best theories "will be found to have assumptions that are wildly inaccurate
descriptive representations of reality, and, in general, the more significant
the theory, the more unrealistic the assumptions. "2 According to this
view, the explanatory power of a theory is all that matters. If unrealistic
assumptions lead to a theory that tells us a lot about how the world
works, it is of no importance whether the underlying assumptions are
realistic or not.
I reject this view. Although I agree that explanatory power is the ultimate
criterion for assessing theories, I also believe that a theory based on
unrealistic or false assumptions will not explain much about how the
world works. 1 Sound theories are based on sound assumptions. Accordingly,
each of these five assumptions is a reasonably accurate representation of
an important aspect of life in the international system.
Bedrock Assumptions
The first assumption is that the international system is anarchic, which
does not mean that it is chaotic or riven by disorder. It is easy to draw that
conclusion, since realism depicts a world characterized by security competition
and war. By itself, however, the realist notion of anarchy has nothing
to do with conflict; it is an ordering principle, which says that the
system comprises independent states that have no central authority above
them.4 Sovereignty, in other words, inheres in states because there is no
higher ruling body in the international system.' There is no "government
over governments. "6
The second assumption is that great powers inherently possess some
offensive military capability, which gives them the wherewithal to hun
and possibly destroy each other. States are potentially dangerous to each
other, although some states have more military might than others and are
therefore more dangerous. A state's military power is usually identified
with the panicular weaponry at its disposal, although even if there were
Anarchy and the Struggle for Power 31
no weapons, the individuals in those states could still use their feet and
hands to attack the population of another state. After all, for every neck,
there are two hands to choke it.
The third assumption is that states can never be certain about other
states' intentions. Specifically. no state can be sure that another state will
not use its offensive military capability to attack the first state. This is not to
say that states necessarily have hostile intentions. Indeed, all of the states
in the system may be reliably benign, but it is impossible to be sure of that
judgment because intentions are impossible to divine with 1 00 percent certainty.
7 There are many possible causes of aggression, and no state can be
sure that another state is not motivated by one of them.8 Furthermore,
intentions can change quickly, so a state's intentions can be benign one day
and hostile the next. Uncertainty about intentions is unavoidable, which
means that states can never be sure that other states do not have offensive
intentions to go along with their offensive capabilities.
The fourth assumption is that survival is the primary goal of great powers.
Specifically, states seek to maintain their territorial integrity and the
autonomy of their domestic political order. Survival dominates other
motives because, once a state is conquered, it is unlikely to be in a position
to pursue other aims. Soviet leader Josef Stalin put the point well
during a war scare in 1 927: "We can and must build socialism in the
[ Soviet Union ] . But in order to do so we first of all have to exist."' States
can and do pursue other goals, of course, but security is their most important
objective.
The fifth assumption is that great powers are rational actors. They are
aware of their external environment and they think strategically about
how to survive in it. In particular, they consider the preferences of other
states and how their own behavior is likely to affect the behavior of those
other states, and how the behavior of those other states is likely to affect
their own strategy for survival. Moreover, states pay attention to the long
term a s well as the immediate consequences of their actions.
As emphasized, none of these assumptions alone dictates that great
powers as a general rule should behave aggressively toward each other.
There is surely the possibility that some state might have hostile intentions.
)2 T H I T R A G I D Y OP G R I A T P O W I R P O L I T I C S
but the only assumption dealing with a specific motive that i s common to
all states says that their principal objective is to survive, which by itself is a
rather harmless goal. Nevertheless, when the five assumptions are married
together, they create powerful incentives for great powers to think and act
offensively with regard to each other. In particular, three general patterns
of behavior result: fear, self-help, and power maximization.
State Behavior
Great powers fear each other. They regard each other with suspicion, and
they worry that war might be in the offing. They anticipate danger. There
is little room for trust among states. For sure, the level of fear varies across
time and space, but it cannot be reduced to a trivial level. From the perspedive
of any one great power, all other great powers are potential enemies.
This point is illustrated by the reaction of the United Kingdom and
France to German reunification at the end of the Cold War. Despite the
fact that these three states had been dose allies for almost forty-five years,
both the United Kingdom and France immediately began worrying about
the potential dangers of a united Germany. ' ‘
The basis of this fear is t h a t in a world where great powers have the
capability to attack each other and might have the motive to do so, any
state bent on survival must be at least suspicious of other states and reluctant
to trust them. Add to this the " 9 1 1 " problem-the absence of a central
authority to which a threatened state can tum for help-and states
have even greater incentive to fear each other. Moreover, there is no
mechanism, other than the possible self-interest of third parties, for punishing
an aggressor. Because it is sometimes difficult to deter potential
aggressors, states have ample reason not to trust other states and to be
prepared for war with them.
The possible consequences of falling victim to aggression further amplify
the importance of fear as a motivating force in world politics. Great powers
do not compete with each other as if international politics were merely
an economic marketplace. Political competition among states is a much
more dangerous business than mere economic intercourse; the former can
Anarchy ancl the Struggle for Power ) )
lead to war. and war often means mass killing on the battlefield as well as
mass murder of civilians. In extreme cases, war can even lead to the
destruction of states. The horrible consequences of war sometimes cause
states to view each other not j ust as competitors, but as potentially deadly
enemies. Political antagonism, in short, tends to be intense, because the
stakes are great.
States in the international system also aim to guarantee their own survival.
Because other states are potential threats, and because there is no
higher authority to come to their rescue when they dial 9 1 1 , states cannot
depend on others for their own security. Each state tends to see itself
as vulnerable and alone, and therefore it aims to provide for its own survival.
In international politics, God helps those who help themselves.
This emphasis on self-help does not preclude states from forming
alliances.u But alliances are only temporary marriages of convenience:
today's alliance partner might be tomorrow's enemy, and today's enemy
might be tomorrow's alliance partner. For example, the United States
fought with China and the Soviet Union against Germany and Japan in
World War II, but soon thereafter flip-flopped enemies and partners and
allied with West Germany and Japan against China and the Soviet Union
during the Cold War.
States operating in a self-help world almost always act according to
their own self-interest and do not subordinate their interests to the interests
of other states, or to the interests of the so-called international community.
The reason is simple: it pays to be selfish in a self-help world. This
is true in the short term as well as in the long term, because if a state loses
in the short run, it might not be around for the long haul.
Apprehensive about the ultimate intentions of other states. and aware
that they operate in a self-help system, states quickly understand that the
best way to ensure their survival is to be the most powerful state in the
system. The stronger a state is relative to its potential rivals, the less likely
it is that any of those rivals will attack it and threaten its survival. Weaker
states will be reluctant to pick fights with more powerful states because
the weaker states are likely to suffer military defeat. Indeed, the bigger the
gap in power between any two states, the less likely it is that the weaker
14 T H E T R A G I D Y OP G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
will attack the stronger. Neither Canada nor Mexico, for example, would
countenance attacking the United States, which is far more powerful than
its neighbors. The ideal situation is to be the hegemon in the system. As
Immanuel Kant said, "It is the desire of every state, or of its ruler, to arrive
at a condition of perpetual peace by conquering the whole world, if that
were possible. "12 Survival would then be almost guaranteed. u
Consequently. states pay close attention to how power is distributed
among them, and they make a special effon to maximize their share of
world power. Specifically. they look for opportunities to alter the balance
of power by acquiring additional increments of power at the expense of
potential rivals. States employ a variety of means-economic, diplomatic,
and military-to shift the balance of power in their favor. even if doing so
makes other states suspicious or even hostile. Because one state's gain in
power is another state's loss, great powers tend to have a zero-sum mentality
when dealing with each other. The trick, of course, is to be the winner
in this competition and to dominate the other states in the system.
Thus, the claim that states maximize relative power is tantamount to
arguing that states are disposed to think offensively toward other states,
even though their ultimate motive is simply to survive. In short, great
powers have aggressive intentions. 1 4
Even when a great power achieves a distinct military advantage over its
rivals, it continues looking for chances to gain more power. The pursuit of
power stops only when hegemony is achieved. The idea that a great
power might feel secure without dominating the system, provided it has
an "'appropriate amount" of power, is not persuasive, for two reasons. 1 5
First. i t i s difficult t o assess how much relative power o n e state must have
over its rivals before it is secure. Is twice as much power an appropriate
threshold? Or is three times as much power the magic number? The root
of the problem is that power calculations alone do not determine which
side wins a war. Clever strategies. for example, sometimes allow less powerful
states to defeat more powerful foes.
Second, determining how much power is enough becomes even more
complicated when great powers contemplate how power will be distributed
among them ten or twenty years down the road . The capabilities of
Anarchy a n d the Struggle for Power J5
individual states vary over time, sometimes markedly, and it is often difficult
to predict the direction and scope of change in the balance of power.
Remember, few in the West anticipated the collapse of the Soviet Union
before it happened. In fact, during the first half of the Cold War, many in
the West feared that the Soviet economy would eventually generate
greater wealth than the American economy, which would cause a marked
power shift against the United States and its allies. What the future holds
for China and Russia and what the balance of power will look like in 2020
is difficult to foresee.
Given the difficulty of determining how much power is enough for
today and tomorrow, great powers recognize that the best way to ensure
their security is to achieve hegemony now, thus eliminating any possibility
of a challenge by another great power. Only a misguided state would
pass up an opportunity to be the hegemon in the system because it
thought it already had sufficient power to survive. " But even if a great
power does not have the wherewithal to achieve hegemony (and that is
u s ually the case), it will still act offensively to amass as much power as it
can, because states are almost always better off with more rather than less
power. In shon, states do not become status quo powers until they completely
dominate the system.
All states are influenced by this logic, which means that not only do
they look for opportunities to take advantage of one another. they also
work to ensure that other states do not take advantage of them. After all,
rival states are driven by the same logic, and most states are likely to recognize
their own motives at play in the actions of other states. In short,
states ultimately pay attention to defense as well as offense. They think
about conquest themselves, and they work to check aggressor states from
gaining power at their expense. This inexorably leads to a world of constant
security competition, where states are willing to lie, cheat. and use
brute force if it helps them gain advantage over their rivals. Peace, if one
defines that concept as a state of tranquility or mutual concord, is not likely
to break out in this world.
The ? security dilemma, ， which is one of the most well-known concepts
in the international relations literature, reflects the basic logic of offensive
)6 T H I T R A G E D Y O F G R E AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
realism. The essence o f the dilemma i s that the measures a state takes to
increase its own security usually decrease the security of other states.
Thus, it is difficult for a state to increase its own chances of survival without
threatening the survival of other states. John Herz first introduced the
security dilemma in a I 950 anicle in the journal World Politics. " After discussing
the anarchic nature of international politics, he writes. "Striving to
attain security from . . . attack. [states] are driven to acquire more and
more power in order to escape the impact of the power of others. This. in
tum, renders the others more insecure and compels them to prepare for
the worst. Since none can ever feel entirely secure in such a world of
competing units, power competition ensues, and the vicious circle of security
and power accumulation is on. " 1 8 The implication of Herz's analysis is
clear: the best way for a state to survive in anarchy is to take advantage of
other states and gain power at their expense. The best defense is a good
offense. Since this message is widely understood, ceaseless security competition
ensues. Unfonunately. little can be done to ameliorate the security
dilemma as long as states operate in anarchy.
It should be apparent from this discussion that saying that states are
power maximizers is tantamount to saying that they care about relative
power, not absolute power. There is an important distinction here,
because states concerned about relative power behave differently than do
states interested in absolute power. 1 9 States that maximize relative power
are concerned primarily with the distribution of material capabilities. In
panicular. they try to gain as large a power advantage as possible over
potential rivals. because power is the best means to survival in a dangerous
world. Thus. states motivated by relative power concerns are likely to
forgo large gains in their own power. if such gains give rival states even
greater power. for smaller national gains that nevenheless provide them
with a power advantage over their rivals.20 States that maximize absolute
power. on the other hand, care only about the size of their own gains. not
those of other states. They are not motivated by balance-of-power logic
but instead are concerned with amassing power without regard to how
much power other states control. They would jump at the opponunity for
large gains. even if a rival gained more in the deal. Power. according to
this logic, is not a means to an end (survival ) , but an end in itself."
Calculated Aggression
Anarchy ancl the Struggle for Power J7
There is obviously little room for status quo powers in a world where
states are inclined to look for opportunities to gain more power.
Nevertheless, great powers cannot always act on their offensive intentions,
because behavior is influenced not only by what states want, but
also by their capacity to realize these desires. Every state might want to be
king of the hill, but not every state has the wherewithal to compete for
that lofty position, much less achieve it. Much depends on how military
might is distributed among the great powers. A great power that has a
marked power advantage over its rivals is likely to behave more aggressively,
because it has the capability as well as the incentive to do so.
B y contrast. great powers facing powerful opponents will be less
inclined to consider offensive action and more concerned with defending
the existing balance of power from threats by their more powerful opponents.
Let there be an opportunity for those weaker states to revise the
balance in their own favor, however, and they will take advantage of it.
Stalin put the point well at the end of World War II: ， Everyone imposes
his own system as far as his army can reach. It cannot be otherwise. "' 22
States might also have the capability to gain advantage over a rival power
but nevertheless decide that the perceived costs of offense are too high
and do not j ustify the expected benefits.
In short, great powers are not mindless aggressors so bent on gaining
power that they charge headlong into losing wars or pursue Pyrrhic victories.
O n the contrary. before great powers take offensive actions, they
think carefully about the balance of power and about how other states
will react to their moves. They weigh the costs and risks of offense against
the likely benefits. If the benefits do not outweigh the risks. they sit tight
and wait for a more propitious moment. Nor do states start arms races that
are unlikely to improve their overall position. As discussed at greater length
in Chapter 3, states sometimes limit defense spending either because spending
more would bring n o strategic advantage or because spending more
would weaken the economy and undermine the state's power in the long
run." To paraphrase Clint Eastwood, a state has to know its limitations to
survive in the international system.
)8 T H I T R A G I D Y OP G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
Nevertheless, great powers miscalculate from time t o time because they
invariably make imponant decisions on the basis of imperfect information.
States hardly ever have complete information about any situation
they confront. There are two dimensions to this problem. Potential adversaries
have incentives to misrepresent their own strength or weakness,
and to conceal their true aims.24 For example, a weaker state trying to
deter a stronger state is likely to exaggerate its own power to discourage
the potential aggressor from attacking. On the other hand, a state bent on
aggression is likely to emphasize its peaceful goals while exaggerating its
military weakness, so that the potential victim does not build up its own
arms and thus leaves itself vulnerable to attack. Probably no national
leader was better at practicing this kind of deception than Adolf Hitler.
But even if disinformation was not a problem, great powers are often
unsure about how their own military forces, as well as the adversary's,
will perform on the battlefield. For example, it is sometimes difficult to
determine in advance how new weapons and untested combat units will
perform in the face of enemy fire. Peacetime maneuvers and war games
are helpful but imperfect indicators of what is likely to happen in actual
combat. Fighting wars is a complicated business in which it is often difficult
to predict outcomes. Remember that although the United States and
its allies scored a stunning and remarkably easy victory against Iraq in
early 1 99 1 . most experts at the time believed that Iraq's military would be
a formidable foe and put up stubborn resistance before finally succumbing
to American military might."
Great powers are also sometimes unsure about the resolve of opposing
states as well as allies. For example, Germany believed that if it went to war
against France and Russia in the summer of 1 9 1 4, the United Kingdom
would probably stay out of the fight. Saddam Hussein expected the United
States to stand aside when he invaded Kuwait in August 1 990. Both aggressors
guessed wrong, but each had good reason to think that its initial judgment
was correct. In the 1 9 30s, Adolf Hitler believed that his great-power
rivals would be easy to exploit and isolate because each had little interest
in fighting Germany and instead was determined to get someone else to
assume that burden. He guessed right. In short, great powers constantly
Anarchy ancl the Struggle for Power J9
find themselves confronting situations in which they have to make important
decisions with incomplete information. Not surprisingly, they sometimes
make faulty j u dgments and end up doing themselves serious harm.
Some defensive realists go so far as to suggest that the constraints of the
international system are so powerful that offense rarely succeeds, and that
aggressive great powers invariably end up being punished.26 As noted,
they emphasize that I ) threatened states balance against aggressors and
ultimately crush them, and 2 ) there is an offense-defense balance that is
usually heavily tilted toward the defense, thus making conquest especially
difficult. Great powers, therefore, should be content with the existing balance
of power and not try to change it by force. Alter all. it makes little
sense for a state to initiate a war that it is likely to lose; that would be selfdefeating
behavior. It is better to concentrate instead on preserving the
balance of power.21 Moreover, because aggressors seldom succeed, states
should understand that security is abundant, and thus there is no good
strategic reason for wanting more power in the first place. In a world
where conquest seldom pays, states should have relatively benign intentions
toward each other. If they do not, these defensive realists argue, the
reason is probably poisonous domestic politics, not smart calculations
about how to guarantee one's security in an anarchic world.
There is no question that systemic factors constrain aggression, especially
balancing by threatened states. But defensive realists exaggerate
those restraining forces. 28 Indeed, the historical record provides little support
for their claim that offense rarely succeeds. One study estimates that
there were 6 3 wars between 1 8 1 5 and 1 980, and the initiator won 3 9
times, which translates into about a 60 percent success rate.29 Turning t o
specific cases, Otto v o n Bismarck unified Germany by winning military
victories against Denmark in 1 864, Austria in 1 866, and France i n 1 870,
and the United States as we know it today was created in good part b y
conquest in the nineteenth century. Conquest certainly p a i d big dividends
in these cases. Nazi Germany won wars against Poland in 1 9 3 9 a n d France
in 1 940, but lost to the Soviet Union between 1 94 1 and 1 94 5 . Conquest
ultimately did not pay for the Third Reich, but if Hitler had restrained
himself after the fall of France and had not invaded the Soviet Union,
40 T H I T R A G I D T O F G R E AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
conquest probably would have paid handsomely for the Nazis. In short,
the historical record shows that offense sometimes succeeds and sometimes
does not. The trick for a sophisticated power maximizer is to figure
out when to raise and when to fold. 30
H E G E M O N Y ' S L I M I T S
G reat powers, as I have emphasized, strive t o gain power over their
rivals and hopefully become hegemons. Once a state achieves that
exalted position, it becomes a status quo power. More needs to be said,
however, about the meaning of hegemony.
A hegemon is a state that is so powerful that it dominates all the other
states in the system. 3 1 No other state has the military wherewithal to put
up a serious fight against it. In essence, a hegemon is the only great power
in the system. A state that is substantially more powerful than the other
great powers in the system is not a hegemon, because it faces, by definition,
other great powers. The United Kingdom in the mid-nineteenth century,
for example, is sometimes called a hegemon. But it was not a
hegemon, because there were four other great powers in Europe at the
time-Austria, France, Prussia, and Russia-and the United Kingdom did
not dominate them in any meaningful way. In fact, during that period, the
United Kingdom considered France to be a serious threat to the balance of
power. Europe in the nineteenth century was multipolar, not unipolar.
Hegemony means domination of the system, which is usually interpreted
to mean the entire world. It is possible, however, to apply the concept
of a system more narrowly and use it to describe panicular regions, such
as Europe, Nonheast Asia, and the Western Hemisphere. Thus. one can
distinguish between global hegemons, which dominate the world, and
regional hegemons, which dominate distinct geographical areas. The United
States has been a regional hegemon in the Western Hemisphere for at
least the past one hundred years. No other state in the Americas has sufficient
military might to challenge it, which is why the United States is
widely recognized as the only great power in its region.
Anarchy anti the Stru91I? for Power 4 1
My argument, which I develop at length in subsequent chapters, is that
except for the unlikely event wherein one state achieves clear-cut nuclear
superiority, it is virtually impossible for any state to achieve global hegemony.
The principal impediment to world domination is the difficulty of
projecting power across the world's oceans onto the territory of a rival
great power. The United States, for example, is the most powerful state on
the planet today. But it does not dominate Europe and Northeast Asia the
way it does the Western Hemisphere, and it has no intention of trying to
conquer and control those distant regions, mainly because of the stopping
power of water. Indeed, there is reason to think that the American military
commitment to Europe and Northeast Asia might wither away over
the next decade. In short, there has never been a global hegemon, and
there is not likely to be one anytime soon.
The best outcome a great power can hope for is to be a regional hegemon
and possibly control another region that is nearby and accessible
over land. The United States is the only regional hegemon in modem history,
although other states have fought major wars in pursuit of regional
hegemony: imperial Japan in Northeast Asia, and Napoleonic France,
Wilhelmine Germany, and Nazi Germany in Europe. But none succeeded.
The Soviet Union, which is located in Europe and Northeast Asia, threatened
to dominate both of those regions during the Cold War. The Soviet
Union might also have attempted to conquer the oil-rich Persian Gulf
region, with which it shared a border. But even if Moscow had been able
to dominate Europe. Northeast Asia, and the Persian Gulf, which it never
came dose to doing, it still would have been unable to conquer the
Western Hemisphere and become a true global hegemon .
States that achieve regional hegemony seek to prevent great powers i n
o t h e r regions from duplicating their feat. Regional hegemons, in other
words, do not want peers. Thus the United States, for example, played a
key role in preventing imperial Japan, Wilhelmine Germany, Nazi
Germany, and the Soviet Union from gaining regional supremacy.
Regional hegemons attempt to check aspiring hegemons in other regions
because they fear that a rival great power that dominates its own region
will be an especially powerful foe that is essentially free to cause trouble
42 T H I T R A O I D Y Of G R I A T P O W E R P O L I T I C S
i n the fearful great power's backyard. Regional hegemons prefer that
there be at least two great powers located together in other regions,
because their proximity will force them to concentrate their attention on
each other rather than on the distant hegemon.
Furthermore, if a potential hegemon emerges among them, the other
great powers in that region might be able to contain it by themselves,
allowing the distant hegemon to remain safely on the sidelines. Of course,
if the local great powers were unable to do the job, the distant hegemon
would take the appropriate measures to deal with the threatening state.
The United States, as noted, has assumed that burden on four separate
occasions in the twentieth century, which is why it is commonly referred
to as an ?offshore balancer.，
In sum, the ideal situation for any great power is to be the only regional
hegemon in the world. That state would be a status quo power, and it
would go to considerable lengths to preserve the existing distribution of
power. The United States is in that enviable position today; it dominates
the Western Hemisphere and there is no hegemon in any other area of
the world. But if a regional hegemon is confronted with a peer competitor,
it would no longer be a status quo power. Indeed, it would go to considerable
lengths to weaken and maybe even destroy its distant rival. Of
course, both regional hegemons would be motivated by that logic, which
would make for a fierce security competition between them.
POW E R A N D F E A R
That great powers fear each other i s a central aspect o f life i n the international
system. But as noted, the level of fear varies from case to case.
For example, the Soviet Union worried much less about Germany in I 930
than it did in I 939. H o w much states fear each other matters greatly,
because the amount of fear between them largely determines the severity
of their security competition, as well as the probability that they will fight a
war. The more profound the fear is, the more intense is the security competition,
and the more likely is war. The logic is straightforward: a scared
Anarchy a n d the Stru99le for Power 4J
state will look especially hard for ways to enhance its security, and it will
be disposed to pursue risky policies to achieve that end. Therefore. it is
imponant to understand what causes states to fear each other more or less
intensely.
Fear among great powers derives from the fact that they invariably have
some offensive military capability that they can use against each other. and
the fact that one can never be cenain that other states do not intend to use
that power against oneself. Moreover. because states operate in an anarchic
system, there is no night watchman to whom they can tum for help if
another great power attacks them. Although anarchy and uncenainty
about other states' intentions create an irreducible level of fear among
states that leads to power-maximizing behavior, they cannot account for
why sometimes that level of fear is greater than at other times. The reason
is that anarchy and the difficulty of discerning state intentions are constant
facts of life, and constants cannot explain variation. The capability that
states have to threaten each other. however. varies from case to case. and it
is the key factor that drives fear levels up and down. Specifically. the more
power a state possesses, the more fear it generates among its rivals.
Germany. for example, was much more powerful at the end of the 1 9 30s
than it was at the decade's beginning, which is why the Soviets became
increasingly fearful of Germany over the course of that decade.
This discussion of how power affects fear prompts the question, What is
power? It is important to distinguish between potential and actual power.
A state's potential power is based on the size of its population and the
level of its wealth. These two assets are the main building blocks of military
power. Wealthy rivals with large populations can usually build formidable
military forces. A state's actual power is embedded mainly in its
army and the air and naval forces that directly support it. Armies are the
central ingredient of military power, because they are the principal instrument
for conquering and controlling territory-the paramount political
objective in a world of territorial states. In short, the key component of
military might, even in the nuclear age, is land power.
Power considerations affect the intensity of fear among states in three
main ways. First, rival states that possess nuclear forces that can survive a
44 T H E T R A G E D Y Of O R I A T P O W E R P O L I T I C S
nuclear attack and retaliate against i t are likely t o fear each other less than
if these same states had no nuclear weapons. During the Cold War, for
example, the level of fear between the superpowers probably would have
been substantially greater if nuclear weapons had not been invented. The
logic here is simple: because nuclear weapons can inflict devastating
destruction on a rival state in a short period of time, nuclear-armed rivals
are going to be reluctant to fight with each other, which means that each
side will have less reason to fear the other than would otherwise be the
case. But as the Cold War demonstrates, this does not mean that war
between nuclear powers is no longer thinkable; they still have reason to
fear each other.
Second, when great powers are separated by large bodies of water, they
usually do not have much offensive capability against each other, regardless
of the relative size of their armies. Large bodies of water are formidable
obstacles that cause significant power-projection problems for attacking
armies. For example, the stopping power of water explains in good part
why the United Kingdom and the United States {since becoming a great
power in 1 898) have never been invaded by another great power. It also
explains why the United States has never tried to conquer territory in
Europe or Northeast Asia, and why the United Kingdom has never
attempted to dominate the European continent. Great powers located on
the same landmass are in a much better position to attack and conquer
each other. That is especially true of states that share a common border.
Therefore, great powers separated by water are likely to fear each other
less than great powers that can get at each other over land.
Third, the distribution of power among the states in the system also
markedly affects the levels of fear." The key issue is whether power is distributed
more or less evenly among the great powers or whether there are
sharp power asymmetries. The configuration of power that generates the
most fear is a multipolar system that contains a potential hegemon-what
I call ，unbalanced multipolarity. ?
A potential hegemon is more than just the most powerful state in the
system. It is a great power with so much actual military capability and so
much potential power that it stands a good chance of dominating and
Anarchy ancl the Stru99le for Power 4'
controlling all of the other great powers in its region of the world. A
potential hegemon need not have the wherewithal to fight all of its rivals
at once. but it must have excellent prospects of defeating each opponent
alone. and good prospects of defeating some of them in tandem. The key
relationship, however. is the power gap between the potential hegemon
and the second most powerful state in the system: there must be a marked
gap between them. To qualify as a potential hegemon, a state must haveby
some reasonably large margin-the most formidable army as well as
the most latent power among all the states located in its region.
Bipolarity is the power configuration that produces the least amount of
fear among the great powers. although not a negligible amount by any
means. Fear tends to be less acute in bipolarity. because there is usually a
rough balance of power between the two major states in the system.
Multipolar systems without a potential hegemon, what I call "balanced
multipolarity. ? are still likely to have power asymmetries among their
members, although these asymmetries will not be as pronounced as the
gaps created by the presence of an aspiring hegemon. Therefore. balanced
multipolarity is likely to generate less fear than unbalanced multipolarity,
but more fear than bipolarity.
This discussion of how the level of fear between great powers varies
with changes in the distribution of power, not with assessments about
each other's intentions, raises a related point. When a state s u rveys its
environment to determine which states pose a threat to its survival, it
focuses mainly on the offensive capabilities of potential rivals, not their
intentions. As emphasized earlier, intentions are ultimately unknowable,
so states worried about their survival must make worst-case assumptions
about their rivals' intentions. Capabilities, however, not only can be measured
but also determine whether or not a rival state is a serious threat. I n
shon, great powers balance against capabilities, n o t intentions. n
Great powers obviously balance against states with formidable military
forces, because that offensive military capability is the tangible threat to
their survival. But great powers also pay careful attention to how much
latent power rival states control. because rich and populous states usually
can and do build powerful armies. Thus. great powers tend to fear states
46 T H I T R A G I D Y OF O R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
with large populations and rapidly expanding economies, even if these
states have not yet translated their wealth into military might.
T H E H I E R A R C H Y OF S TAT E GOA L S
5 urvival i s the number one goal o f great powers, according t o m y theory.
In practice. however. states pursue non-security goals as well. For
example, great powers invariably seek greater economic prosperity to
enhance the welfare of their citizenry. They sometimes seek to promote a
panicular ideology abroad, as happened during the Cold War when the
the United States tried to spread democracy around the world and the
Soviet Union tried to sell communism. National unification is another goal
that sometimes motivates states, as it did with Prussia and Italy in the
nineteenth century and Germany after the Cold War. Great powers also
occasionally try to foster human rights around the globe . States might
pursue any of these. as well as a number of other non-security goals.
Offensive realism cenainly recognizes that great powers might pursue
these non-security goals. but it has little to say about them, save for one
imponant point: states can pursue them as long as the requisite behavior
does not conflict with balance-of-power logic, which is often the case. w
Indeed, the pursuit of these non-security goals sometimes complements
the hunt for relative power. For example, Nazi Germany expanded into
eastern Europe for both ideological and realist reasons, and the superpowers
competed with each other during the Cold War for similar reasons.
Funhermore, greater economic prosperity invariably means greater
wealth, which has significant implications for security, because wealth is
the foundation of military power. Wealthy states can afford powerful military
forces, which enhance a state's prospects for survival. As the political
economist Jacob Viner noted more than fifty years ago, "there is a longrun
harmony， between wealth and power. " National unification is another
goal that usually complements the pursuit of power. For example, the
unified German state that emerged in 1 8 7 1 was more powerful than the
Prussian state it replaced.
Anarchy and the Stru99I? for Power 47
Sometimes the pursuit of non-security goals has hardly any effect on
the balance of power. one way or the other. Human rights interventions
usually fit this description, because they tend to be small-scale operations
that cost little and do not detract from a great power's prospects for survival.
For better or for worse, states are rarely willing to expend blood and
treasure to protect foreign populations from gross abuses. including genocide.
For instance. despite claims that American foreign policy is infused
with moralism, Somalia ( 1 992-9 3 ) is the only instance during the past
one hundred years in which U.S. soldiers were killed in action on a
humanitarian mission. And in that case, the loss of a mere eighteen soldiers
in an infamous firefight in October 1 99 3 so traumatized American
policymakers that they immediately pulled all U.S. troops out of Somalia
and then refused to intervene in Rwanda in the spring of 1 994, when ethnic
Hutu went on a genocidal rampage against their Tutsi neighbors. )6
Stopping that genocide would have been relatively easy and it would have
had vinually no effect on the position of the United States in the balance
of power." Yet nothing was done. In shon, although realism does not prescribe
human rights interventions, it does not necessarily proscribe them.
But sometimes the pursuit of non-security goals conOicts with balanceof-
power logic, in which case states usually act according to the dictates of
realism. For example, despite the U.S. commitment to spreading democracy
across the globe, it helped ovenhrow democratically elected governments
and embraced a number of authoritarian regimes during the Cold
War. when American policymakers felt that these actions would help contain
the Soviet Union . " In World War II, the liberal democracies put aside
their antipathy for communism and formed an alliance with the Soviet
Union against Nazi Germany. " f can't take communism,? Franklin
Roosevelt emphasized, but to defeat Hitler ，1 would hold hands with the
Devil. . ,. In the same way, Stalin repeatedly demonstrated that when his
ideological preferences clashed with power considerations, the latter won
out. To take the most blatant example of his realism, the Soviet Union
formed a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany in August 1 9 39-the
infamous Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact-in hopes that the agreement would
at least temporarily satisfy Hitler's territorial ambitions in eastern Europe
48 T H I T R A G E D Y OF G R E AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
and turn the Wehrmacht toward France and the United Kingdom.40 When
great powers confront a serious threat, in short, they pay little attention to
ideology as they search for alliance partners.41
Security also trumps wealth when those two goals conflict, because
"'defence," as Adam Smith wrote in The Wealth of Nations, "is of much more
importance than opulence. "41 Smith provides a good illustration of how
states behave when forced to choose between wealth and relative power.
In 1 651 , England put into effect the famous Navigation Act protectionist
legislation designed to damage Holland's commerce and ultimately cripple
the D utch economy. The legislation mandated that all goods imported into
England be carried either in English ships or ships owned by the country
that originally produced the goods. Since the Dutch produced few goods
themselves, this measure would badly damage their shipping, the central
ingredient in their economic success. Of course, the Navigation Act would
hurt England's economy as well, mainly because it would rob E ngland of
the benefits of free trade. "The act of navigation, " Smith wrote, "is not
favorable to foreign commerce, or to the growth of that opulence that can
arise from it." Nevertheless, Smith considered the legislation "the wisest of
all the commercial regulations of England" because it did more damage to
the Dutch economy than to the English economy, and in the mid-seventeenth
century Holland was "the only naval power which could endanger
the security of England. "43
C R E AT I N G W O R L D O R D E R
The claim i s sometimes made that great powers can transcend realist logic
by working together to build an international order that fosters peace
and j ustice. World peace, it would appear, can only enhance a state's prosperity
and security. America's political leaders paid considerable lip service
to this line of argument over the course of the twentieth century. President
Clinton, for example, told an audience at the United Nations in September
1 993 that ?at the birth of this organization 48 years ago . . . a generation of
gifted leaders from many nations stepped forward to organize the world's
efforts on behalf of security and prosperity . . . . Now history has granted to
Anarchy ancl the Stru99I? for Power 49
us a moment of even greater opponunity . . . . Let us resolve that we will
dream larger. . . . Let us ensure that the world we pass to our children is
healthier, safer and more abundant than the one we inhabit today."44
This rhetoric notwithstanding, great powers do not work together to
promote world order for its own sake. Instead, each seeks to maximize its
own share of world power, which is likely to clash with the goal of creating
and sustaining stable international orders.45 This is not to say that
great powers never aim to prevent wars and keep the peace. On the con，
trary, they work hard to deter wars in which they would be the likely victim.
In such cases, however, state behavior is driven largely by narrow
calculations about relative power. not by a commitment to build a world
order independent of a state's own interests. The United States, for exam，
pie, devoted enormous resources to deterring the Soviet Union from stan，
ing a war in Europe during the Cold War, not because ol some
deep，seated commitment to promoting peace around the world, but
because American leaders feared that a Soviet victory would lead to a
dangerous shift in the balance of power.46
The panicular international order that obtains at any time is mainly a
by-product of the self-interested behavior of the system's great powers.
The configuration of the system, in other words, is the unintended conse，
quence of great，power security competition, not the result of states acting
together to organize peace. The establishment of the Cold War order in
E u rope illustrates this point. Neither the Soviet Union nor the United
States intended to establish it, nor did they work together to create it. In
fact, each superpower worked hard in the early years of the Cold War to
gain power at the expense of the other, while preventing the other from
doing likewise." The system that emerged in E u rope in the aftermath of
World War II was the unplanned consequence of intense security competition
between the superpowers.
Although that intense superpower rivalry ended along with the Cold War
in 1 990, R ussia and the United States have not worked together to create
the present order in Europe. The United States, for example, has rejected
out of hand various Russian proposals to make the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in E u rope the central organizing pillar of
European security ( replacing the U.S. -dominated NATO ) . Funhermore,
50 T H I T R A G I D Y OF G R E AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
Russia was deeply opposed to NATO expansion, which i t viewed a s a serious
threat to Russian security. Recognizing that Russia's weakness would preclude
any retaliation, however, the United States ignored Russia's concerns
and pushed NATO to accept the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland as
new members. Russia has also opposed U.S. policy in the Balkans over the
past decade, especially NATO's 1 999 war against Yugoslavia. Again, the
United States has paid little attention to Russia's concerns and has taken
the steps it deems necessary to bring peace to that volatile region. Finally, it
is worth noting that although Russia is dead set against allowing the United
States to deploy ballistic missile defenses, it is highly likely that Washington
will deploy such a system if it is judged to be technologically feasible.
For sure. great-power rivalry will sometimes produce a stable international
order, as happened during the Cold War. Nevenheless, the great
powers will continue looking for opportunities to increase their share of
world power, and if a favorable situation arises. they will move to undermine
that stable order. Consider how hard the United States worked during
the late 1 980s to weaken the Soviet Union and bring down the stable
order that had emerged in Europe during the latter pan of the Cold War.48
Of course, the states that stand to lose power will work to deter aggression
and preserve the existing order. But their motives will be selfish, revolving
around balance-of-power logic, not some commitment to world peace.
Great powers cannot commit themselves to the pursuit of a peaceful
world order for two reasons. First, states are unlikely to agree on a general
formula for bolstering peace. Certainly, international relations scholars
have never reached a consensus on what the blueprint should look like.
In fact. it seems there are about as many theories on the causes of war and
peace as there are scholars studying the subject. But more imponant, policymakers
are unable to agree on how to create a stable world. For example,
at the Paris Peace Conference alter World War I, imponant differences
over how to create stability in Europe divided Georges Clemenceau, David
Lloyd George, and Woodrow Wilson.49 In panicular, Clemenceau was
determined to impose harsher terms on Germany over the Rhineland
than was either Lloyd George or Wilson, while Lloyd George stood out as
the hard-liner on German reparations. The Treaty of Versailles, not surprisingly,
did little to promote European stability.
Anarchy ancl the Struggle for Power 5 1
Furthermore, consider American thinking on h o w to achieve stability
in Europe in the early days of the Cold War.50 The key elements for a sta，
ble and durable system were in place by the early 1 9 50s. They included
the division of Germany, the positioning of American ground forces in
Western Europe to deter a Soviet attack, and ensuring that West Germany
would not seek to develop nuclear weapons. Officials in the Truman
administration, however, disagreed about whether a divided Germany
would be a source of peace or war. For example, George Kennan and Paul
Nitze, who held important positions in the State Department, believed
that a divided Germany would be a source of instability, whereas
Secretary of State Dean Acheson disagreed with them. In the 1 9 50s,
President Eisenhower sought to end the American commitment to defend
Western Europe and to provide West Germany with its own nuclear
deterrent. This policy, which was never fully adopted. nevenheless caused
significant instability in Europe, as it led directly to the Berlin crises of
1 9 58-59 and 1 96 1 .5 1
Second, great powers cannot p u t aside power considerations a n d work
to promote international peace because they cannot be sure that their
effons will succeed. If their attempt fails. they are likely to pay a steep
price for having neglected the balance of power, because if an aggressor
appears at the door there will be no answer when they dial 9 1 1 . That is a
risk few states are willing to run. Therefore, prudence dictates that they
behave according to realist logic. This line of reasoning accounts for why
collective security schemes. which call for states to put aside narrow con，
cems about the balance of power and instead act in accordance with the
broader interests of the international community, invariably die at birt h . 52
C OO P E R AT I ON A M O N G STAT E S
0 n e might conclude from the preceding discussion that m y theory
does not allow for any cooperation among the great powers. But this
conclusion would be wrong. States can cooperate. although cooperation is
sometimes difficult to achieve and always difficult to sustain. Two factors
inhibit cooperation: considerations about relative gains and concern about
5 2 T H I T R A G I D Y O f G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
cheating." Ultimately. great powers live i n a fundamentally competitive
world where they view each other as real. or at least potential, enemies,
and they therefore look to gain power at each other's expense.
Any two states contemplating cooperation must consider how profits or
gains will be distributed between them. They can think about the division
in terms of either absolute or relative gains (recall the distinction made
earlier between pursuing either absolute power or relative power; the
concept here is the same) . With absolute gains, each side is concerned
with maximizing its own profits and cares little about how much the
other side gains or loses in the deal. Each side cares about the other only
to the extent that the other side's behavior affects its own prospects for
achieving maximum profits. With relative gains, on the other hand, each
side considers not only its own individual gain, but also how well it fares
compared to the other side.
Because great powers care deeply about the balance of power, their
thinking focuses on relative gains when they consider cooperating with
other states. For sure, each state tries to maximize its absolute gains; still,
it is more important for a state to make sure that it does no worse, and
perhaps better, than the other state in any agreement. Cooperation is
more difficult to achieve, however, when states are attuned to relative
gains rather than absolute gains. 54 This is because states concerned about
absolute gains have to make sure that if the pie is expanding, they are getting
at least some portion of the increase, whereas states that worry about
relative gains must pay careful attention to how the pie is divided, which
complicates cooperative efforts.
Concerns about cheating also hinder cooperation. Great powers are
often reluctant to enter into cooperative agreements for fear that the other
side will cheat on the agreement and gain a significant advantage. This
concern is especially acute in the military realm, causing a ?special peril of
defection." because the nature of military weaponry allows for rapid shifts
in the balance of power." Such a development could create a window of
opponunity for the state that cheats to inflict a decisive defeat on its victim.
These barriers to cooperation notwithstanding. great powers do cooperate
in a realist world. Balance-of-power logic often causes great powers to
Anarchy a n d the Struggle for Power 'J
form alliances and cooperate against common enemies. The United
Kingdom, France, and Russia, for example, were allies against Germany
before and during World War I. States sometimes cooperate to gang up on
a third state, as Germany and the Soviet Union did against Poland in 1 939.56
More recently, Serbia and Croatia agreed to conquer and divide B osnia
between them, although the United States and its European allies prevented
them from executing their agreement.57 Rivals as well as allies cooperate.
After all. deals can be struck that roughly reflect the distribution of power
and satisfy concerns about cheating. The various arms control agreements
signed by the superpowers during the Cold War illustrate this point.
The bottom line, however, is that cooperation takes place in a world
that is competitive at its core-one where states have powerful incentives
to take advantage of other states. This point is graphically highlighted by
the state of European politics in the forty years before World War I. The
great powers cooperated frequently during this period, but that did not
stop them from going to war on August I, 1 9 1 4. " The United States and
the Soviet Union also cooperated considerably during World War II, but
that cooperation did not prevent the outbreak of the Cold War shortly
after Germany and Japan were defeated. Perhaps most amazingly. there
was significant economic and military cooperation between Nazi Germany
and the Soviet Union during the two years before the Wehrmacht
attacked the Red Army.59 No amount of cooperation can eliminate the
dominating logic of security competition . Genuine peace, or a world in
which states do not compete for power, is not likely as long as the state
system remains anarchic.
C O N C L U S I O N
In sum, m y argument i s that the structure o f the international system, not
the particular characteristics of individual great powers. causes them to
think and act offensively and to seek hegemony. 60 I do not adopt
Morgenthau's claim that states invariably behave aggressively because they
have a will to power hardwired into them. Instead. I assume that the prin$
4 T H E T R A G E D Y OF G R E A T P O W E R P O L I T I CS
dpaI motive behind great，power behavior is survival. In anarchy, however,
the desire to survive encourages states to behave aggressively. Nor does my
theory classify states as more or Jess aggressive on the basis of their eco，
nomic or political systems. Offensive realism makes only a handful of
assumptions about great powers, and these assumptions apply equally to
all great powers. Except for differences in how much power each state controls,
the theory treats all states alike.
I have now laid out the logic explaining why states seek to gain as
much power as possible over their rivals. I have said little, however, about
the object of that pursuit: power itself. The next two chapters provide a
detailed discussion of this important subject.
John J. Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great
Power Politics. New York: Norton, 2001.
SEVEN
The Off shore Balancers
I have reserved discussion of the American and British cases for a separate
chapter because they might appear to provide the strongest evidence
against my claim that great powers are dedicated to maximizing
their share of world power. Many Americans certainly view their country
as a truly exceptional great power that has been motivated largely by noble
intentions, not balance-of-power logic. Even important realist thinkers
such as Norman Graebner, George Kennan, and Walter Lippmann believe
that the United States has frequently ignored the imperatives of power politics
and instead acted in accordance with idealist values. 1 This same perspective
is evident in the United Kingdom, which is why E. H. Carr wrote
The 1\.venty Yea rs ' Crisis in the late 1930s. He was warning his fellow citizens
about their excessive idealism in foreign policy matters and reminding
them that competition for power among states is the essence of international
politics.2
There are three particular instances where it might seem that the
United Kingdom and the United States passed up opportunities to gain
power. First, it is usually said that the United States achieved great-power
status in about 1898, when it won the Spanish-American War, which
gave it control over the fate of Cuba, Guam, the Philippines, and Puerto
Rico, and also when it began building a sizable military machine.3 By
234
The Ofhhore aalancers 235
1 8 50, however, the United States already stretched from the Atlantic to
the Pacific and, as was shown in Table 6.2, clearly possessed the economic
wherewithal to become a great power and compete around the globe with
Europe's major powers. Yet it did not build powerful military forces
between 1 8 5 0 and 1 898, and it made little effort to conquer territory in
the Western Hemisphere, much less outside of it. Fareed Zakaria describes
this period as a case of "imperial understretch. "4 The seeming failure of
the United States to become a great power and pursue a policy of conquest
i n the second half of the nineteenth century might seem to contradict
offensive realism.
Second, the United States was no ordinary great power by 1 900. It had
the most powerful economy in the world and it had clearly gained hegemony
in the Western Hemisphere (see Table 6 . 2 ) . Although neither of
those conditions changed over the course of the twentieth century, the
United States did not attempt to conquer territory in Europe or Northeast
Asia o r dominate those wealth-producing regions of the world. lf anything,
the United States has been anxious to avoid sending troops to
Europe and Northeast Asia, and when it has been forced to do so, it has
usually been anxious to bring them back home as soon as possible. This
reluctance to expand into Europe and Asia might appear to contradict my
claim that states try to maximize their relative power.
Third, the United Kingdom had substantially more potential power
than a n y other E uropean state during most of the nineteenth century. ln
fact, between 1 840 and 1 860, B ritain controlled nearly 7 0 percent of
European i n d ustrial might, almost five times more than France, its closest
competitor (see Table 3 . 3 ) . Nevertheless, the United Kingdom did not
translate its abundant wealth into actual military might and attempt to
dominate E u ro p e . I n a world where great powers are supposed to have an
insatiable a p p etite for power and ultimately aim for regional hegemony,
one might expect the United Kingdom to have acted like Napoleonic
France, Wilhelmine Germany, Nazi Germany, and the Soviet Union and
pushed hard t o become E u rope's hegemon. B u t it did not.
The notion that the United Kingdom and the United States have not
been power maximizers over much of the past two centuries is intuitively
236 T H E T R A G E D Y O P O R I A T ll O W I R P O L I T I C S
appealing a t first glance. The fact is, however, both states have consistently
acted as offensive realism would predict.
American foreign policy throughout the nineteenth century had one
overarching goal: achieving hegemony in the Western Hemisphere. That
task, which was motivated in good pan by realist logic, involved building
a powerful United States that could dominate the other independent
states of Nonh and South America and also prevent the European great
powers from projecting their military might across the Atlantic Ocean.
The American drive for hegemony was successful. Indeed, as emphasized
earlier, the United States is the only state in modem times to have gained
regional hegemony. This impressive achievement, not some purponed
noble behavior toward the outside world, is the real basis of American
exceptionalism in the foreign policy realm.
There was no good strategic reason for the United States to acquire
more territory in the Western Hemisphere after 1 8 50, as it had already
acquired a huge land mass over which its rule needed to be consolidated.
Once that happened. the United States would be overwhelmingly powerful
in the Americas. The United States paid little attention to the balance
of power in Europe and Nonheast Asia during the second half of the nineteenth
century, not only because it was forused on gaining regional hegemony,
but also because there were no potential peer competitors to worry
about in either region. Finally. the United States did not build large and
formidable military forces between 1 8 5 0 and 1 898 because there was no
significant opposition to the growth of American power in those years.5
The United Kingdom kept few troops in Nonh America. and the Native
Americans possessed little military might. In essence. the United States
was able to gain regional hegemony on the cheap.
The United States did not attempt to conquer territory in either E u rope
or Nonheast Asia during the twentieth century because of the difficulty of
projecting military forces across the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans against the
great powers located in those regions.? Every great power would like to
dominate the world. but none has ever had or is likely to have the military
capability to become a global hegemon. Thus. the ultimate goal of great
powers is to achieve regional hegemony and block the rise of peer comThe
Offsh ore Balancers 237
petitors in distant areas of the globe. In essence. states that gain regional
hegemony act as offshore balancers in other regions. Nevertheless, those
distant hegemons usually prefer to let the local great powers check an aspiring
hegemon. while they watch from the sidelines. But sometimes this
buck-passing strategy is not feasible, and the distant hegemon has to step
in and balance against the rising power.
American military forces were sent to Europe and Northeast Asia at different
times during the twentieth century, and the pattern of commitments
follows the logic described above. In particular. whenever a
potential peer competitor emerged in either of those regions, the United
States sought to check it and preserve America's unique position as the
world's only regional hegemon. As emphasized, hegemons are essentially
status quo powers; the United States is no exception in this regard.
Moreover, American policymakers tried to pass the buck to other great
powers to get them to balance against the potential hegemon. But when
that approach failed, the United States used its own military forces to
eliminate the threat and restore a rough balance of power in the area so
that it could bring its troops home. In short, the United States acted as an
offshore balancer during the twentieth century to ensure that it remained
the sole regional hegemon.
The United Kingdom, too, has never tried to dominate Europe, which
is surprising, given that it used its military to forge a vast empire outside of
Europe. Furthermore, the United Kingdom, unlike the United States. is a
E u ropean power. Therefore, one might expect the mid-nineteenth-century
United Kingdom to have translated its fabulous wealth into military
might to make a run at gaining regional hegemony. The reason it did not
do so. however, is basically the same as for the United States: the stopping
power o f water. Like the United States, the United Kingdom is an insular
power that is p hysically separated from the European continent by a large
body o f water (the English Channel) , which makes it virtually impossible
for the United Kingdom to conquer and control all of Europe.
Still. the United Kingdom has consistently acted as an offshore balancer
in Europe, a s offensive realism would predict. Specifically, it has committed
military forces to the continent when a rival great power threatened
218 T H E T R A G E D Y OP G R E AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
t o dominate Europe and buck-passing was not a viable option. Otherwise,
when there has been a rough balance of power in Europe, the British
army has tended to stay off the continent. In sum, neither the United
Kingdom nor the United States has attempted to conquer territory in
Europe in modem times, and both have acted as the balancer of last reson
in that region. 7
This chapter will look more closely at the fit between offensive realism
and the past behavior of the United Kingdom and the United States,
focusing first on the American bid for regional hegemony in the nineteenth
century. The subsequent two sections deal with the commitment of
U.S. military forces to Europe and Northeast Asia in the twentieth century,
while the section thereafter considers the United Kingdom's role as an
offshore balancer in Europe. Some broader implications of the previous
analysis are considered in the final section.
T H E R I S E OF A M E R I C A N P O W E R ( 1 8 0 0 - 1 9 0 0 )
I t i s widely believed that the United States was preoccupied with domestic
politics for most of the nineteenth century and that it had little interest
in international politics. But this perspective makes sense only if
American foreign policy is defined as involvement in areas outside of the
Western Hemisphere, especially Europe. For sure, the United States avoided
entangling alliances in Europe during this period. Nevertheless, it was
deeply concerned with security issues and foreign policy in the Western
Hemisphere between 1 800 and 1 900. Indeed. the United States was bent
on establishing regional hegemony, and it was a n expansionist power of
the first order in the Americas. 8 Henry Cabot Lodge put the point well
when he noted that the United States had .. a record of conquest, colonization,
and territorial expansion unequalled by any people in the nineteenth
cemury. "9 Or the twentieth century, for that matter. When one considers
America's aggressive behavior in the Western Hemisphere, and especially
the results, the United States seems well-suited to be the poster child for
offensive realism.
The Offshore Balancers 2J9
To illustrate the expansion of U.S. military might, consider the U . S .
strategic positions at t h e beginning a n d at t h e e n d o f t h e ninet??enth century.
The United States was in a rather precarious strategic situation in 1 800
(see Map 7 . 1 ) . On the plus side, it was the only independent state in the
Western Hemisphere, and it possessed all the territory between the Atlantic
Ocean and the Mississippi River, save for Florida, which was under Spanish
control. O n the negative side. however, most of the territory between the
Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River was sparsely populated
by white Americans, and much of it was controlled by hostile Native tribes.
Furthermore, Great B ritain and Spain had huge empires in North America.
Between them, they controlled almost all of the territory west of the
Mississippi and most of the territory north and south of the United States.
In fact. the population of the Spanish territory that eventually became
Mexico was slightly larger than America's population in 1 800 (see Table 7 . 1 ) .
B y 1 900, however. the United States was the hegemon o f the Western
Hemisphere. Not only did it control a huge swath of territory running from
the Atlantic to the Pacific, but the European empires had collapsed and gone
away. I n their place were independent states such as Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, and Mexico. But none of them had the population size or wealth to
challenge the United States, which was the richest state on the planet by the
late 1 890s (see Table 6 .2 ) . Hardly anyone disagreed with Richard Olney, the
American secretary of state, when he bluntly told the United Kingdom's Lord
Salisbury in his famous July 20. 1 895, note, "Today the United States is practically
sovereign on this continent. and its fiat is law upon the subjects to
which it confines its interposition . . . . Its infinite resources combined with its
isolated position render it master of the situation and practically invulnerable
as against any or all other powers. " "
The United States established regional hegemony in the nineteenth century
b y relentlessly pursuing two closely linked policies: 1 ) expanding
across Nonh America and building the most powerful state in the Western
Hemisphere, a policy commonly known as "Manifest Destiny，; and 2) minimizing
the influence of the United Kingdom and the other E u ropean great
powers i n the A m e ricas, a policy commonly known a s the ，Monroe
Doctri n e . ，
Pacific
Ocean
North America in 1 800
M A P 7 . 1
Atlantic
Ocean
1 A I L E 7 . 1
Population i n the Western Hemisphere, 1 800-1900
Population in thousands
1 100 1 830 1 150 1 880 1 900
United States 5, 308 1 2,866 2 3, 1 92 50, 1 5 6 7 5 , 9 9 5
Canada 362 1 . 085 2.436 4.325 5 , 3 7 1
Mexico 5 , 7 6 5 6 . 3 8 2 7,8 5 3 9,2 1 0 1 3 ,607
Brazil 2.4 1 9 3,96 1 7,678 9,930 1 7, 4 3 8
Argentina 406 6 3 4 9 3 5 1 , 7 3 7 3 , 9 5 5
Total 1 4,260 24,928 42,094 7 5 . 3 5 8 1 1 6. 3 6 6
Percenta9e of above total
1 100 1 130 1 850 1 880 1 900
United States 3 7 % 5 2 % 5 5 % 67% 65%
Canada 3% 4% 6% 6% 5 %
Mexico 40% 26% 1 9 % 1 2 % 1 2 %
Brazil 1 7 % 1 6 % 1 8 % 1 3 % 1 5 %
Argentina 3 % 3 % 2% 2 % 3 %
NOTE: Because censuses were usually caken ac different times in these countries, only the
figures for the United States are for the exact dates listed in the table. Also. only the United
States was a sovereign state for the entire nineteenth century. The census years and year of
independence for the others are as follows: Canada (independent in 1 8 6 7 ) . 1 80 1 . 1 8 3 1 .
1 8 5 1 , 1 8 8 1 . a n d 1 9 0 1 ; Mexico (independent in 1 82 1 ) , 1 803. 1 8 3 1 . 1 8 54, 1 87 3 . a n d 1 900;
Brazil (independent in 1 82 2 ) , 1 808, 1 82 3 . 1 8 54. 1 872, and 1900; Argentina (independent
in 1 8 1 6 ) , 1 809, 1 829, 1 849, 1 869, and 1 89 5 .
SOURCES: All figures are from B . R . Mitchell, International Historical Statistics: The Americas.
1 750-1 988. 2d ed. (New York: Stockton, 1 99 3 ) , pp. I. 3-5. 7-8.
24l T H I T R A G I D Y O F G R E AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
Man ifest Destiny
The United States started out in 1 776 as a weak confederation cobbled
together from the thirteen colonies strung along the Atlantic seaboard.
The prindpal goal of America's leaders over the next 1 2 5 years was to
achieve the country's so-called Manifest Destiny. I I As noted. the United
States had extended its control to the Mississippi River by 1 800, although
it did not yet control Florida. Over the next fifty years, the United States
expanded westward across the continent to the Padfic Ocean . During the
second half of the nineteenth century, the United States focused on consolidating
its territorial gains and creating a rich and cohesive state.
The expansion of the United States between 1 800 and 1 8 5 0 involved
five major steps (see Map 7 . 2 ) . The huge Louisiana Territory on the western
side of the Mississippi River was purchased from France in 1 80 3 for
$ 1 5 million. Napoleonic France had recently acquired that land from
Spain. although it had been under French control from 1 682 until 1 762.
Napoleon needed the proceeds from the sale to finance his wars in
Europe. Furthermore, France was in no position to compete with the
United Kingdom in North America, because the B ritish had a superior
navy that made it difficult for France to project its military might across
the Atlantic Ocean. With the acquisition of the vast Louisiana Territory.
the United States more than doubled its size. The United States made its
next move in 1 8 1 9 when it took Florida from Spain. 1 2 American leaders
had been devising schemes since the early 1 800s to acquire Florida,
including a number of invasions by U . S . troops. Spain finally conceded the
entire territory after American forces captured Pensacola in 1 8 1 8 .
The last three important acquisitions all occurred i n the brief period
between 1 845 and 1 848. 1 1 Texas won its independence from Mexico in
1 8 3 6 and shortly thereafter petitioned to join the United States. The peti，
tion was rejected, however, mainly because of congressional opposition to
admitting Texas as a state in which slavery was legal . 1 4 But that logjam
was eventually broken, and Texas was annexed on December 29, 1 84 5 .
S i x months later. in June 1 846, t h e United States settled a territorial dis，
pule with the United Kingdom over the Oregon Territories, acquiring a
M A P 7 . 2
244 T H I T R A G I D Y O f G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
large chunk o f territory i n the Pacific nonhwest. I n early May 1 846, a few
weeks before the Oregon agreement the United States declared war on
Mexico and went on lO conquer California and most of what is today the
American southwest. In the space of two years, the United States had
grown by 1 .2 million square miles, or about 64 percent. The territorial size
of the Uniled States, according to the head of the Census B ureau, was
now .. nearly ten times as large as that of France and Britain combined;
three times as large as the whole of France, Britain, Austria, Prussia,
Spain, Portugal. Belgium. Holland. and Denmark together . . . [and] of
equal extenl wilh the Roman Empire or that of Alexander. " 1 5
Expansion across the continent was preuy much complete by t h e late
1 840s. although the United States did acquire a small portion of territory
from Mexico in 1 8 5 3 (the Gadsden Purchase) to smooth out the border
between the two countries, and the United States purchased Alaska from
Russia in 1 867. However, the United States did not acquire all the territory
it wanted. In particular, it aimed to conquer Canada when it went to
war with the United Kingdom in 1 8 1 2, and many of its leaders continued
to covet Canada throughout the nineteenth century. 16 There was also
pressure to expand southward into the Caribbean, where Cuba was considered
the prize target . 1 7 Nevenheless, expansion to the nonh and south
never materialized, and the United States instead expanded westward
toward the Pacific Ocean. building a huge territorial state in the process. 18
The United States had little need for more territory after I 848-at least
for security reasons. So its leaders concentrated instead on forging a powerful
state inside its existing borders. This consolidation process, which
was sometimes brutal and bloody. involved four major steps: fighting the
Civil War to eliminate slavery and the threat of dissolution of the union;
displacing the Natives who controlled much of the land that the United
States had recently acquired; bringing large numbers of immigrants to the
United States to help populate its vast expanses of territory; and building
the world's largest economy.
During the first six decades of the nineteenth century, there was constant
friaion between North and South over the slavery issue, especially
as it applied to the newly acquired territories west o f the Mississippi.
The Offshore lalancen
Indeed, the issue was so poisonous that it threatened to tear apan the
United States, a result that would have had profound consequences for
the balance of power in the Western Hemisphere. Matters finally came to
a head in 1 8 6 1 , when the Civil War broke out. The North, which was
fighting to hold the United States together, fared badly at first but eventually
recovered and won a decisive victory. Slavery was quickly ended in all
parts of the United States, and despite the ill will generated by the war.
the country emerged a coherent whole that has since remained firmly
intact. Had the Confederacy triumphed, the United States would not have
become a regional hegemon, since there would have been at least two
great powers in Nonh America. This situation would have created opportunities
for the European great powers to increase their political presence
and influence in the Western Hemisphere. 19
As late as 1 800. Native American tribes controlled huge chunks of territory
in Nonh America that the United States would have to conquer if it
hoped to fulfill Manifest Destiny." The Natives hardly stood a chance of
stopping the United States from taking their land. The Natives had a number
of disadvantages, but most imponant, they were greatly outnumbered
by white Americans and their situation only grew worse with time. In
1 800, for example, about 1 78.000 Natives lived within the borders of the
United States, which then extended to the Mississippi River.21 At the same
time, the population of the United States was roughly 5 . 3 million (see
Table 7 . 1 ) . Not surprisingly, the U.S army had little trouble crushing the
Natives east of the Mississippi, taking their land, and pushing many of
them west of the Mississippi in the first few decades of the nineteenth
century.22
By 1 8 50, when the present borders of the continental United States
were largely in place, there were about 665,000 Native Americans living
inside them. of whom roughly 486,000 lived west of the Mississippi. The
population of the United States, however. had grown to nearly 2 3 . 2 million
by 1 8 50 . Not surprisingly, then, small and somewhat inept U.S. army
units were able to rout the Natives west of the Mississippi and take their
land in the second half of the nineteenth century. 21 Victoiy over the
Natives was complete by 1 900. They were living on a handful of reserva246
T H E T R A G E D Y Of G R E A T P O W E R P O L I T I C S
tions and their total population had shrunk t o about 456,000, of whom
299,000 lived west of the Mississippi. By that time the population of the
United States had reached 76 million.
The population of the United States more than tripled during the second
half of the nineteenth century, in good pan because massive numbers
of European immigrants crossed the Atlantic. Indeed, between 1 8 5 1 and
1 900, approximately 1 6. 7 million immigrants came to the United States.24
By 1 900, 34.2 percent of all 76 million Americans were either born outside
the United States or had at least one parent born in a foreign land.25
Many of those immigrants came looking for jobs, which they found in the
expanding U.S. economy. At the same time, however, they contributed to
the strength of that economy, which grew by leaps and bounds in the latter
pan of the nineteenth century. Consider, for example, that the United
Kingdom was the world's wealthiest country in 1 8 50, with roughly four
times the industrial might of the United States. Only fifty years later, however,
the United States was the wealthiest country on the globe and had
more than l . 6 times the industrial might of the United Kingdom ( see
Table 6 . 2 ) .
The United Kingdom a n d t h e United States ended their l o n g rivalry i n
North America during the early years of t h e twentieth century. In effect.
the United Kingdom retreated across the Atlantic Ocean and left the
United States to run the Western Hemisphere. A commonplace explanation
for this rapprochement is that the United Kingdom had to consolidate
its military forces in Europe to check a rising Germany, so it cut a deal
with the United States, which was accommodating because it had a vested
interest in getting the British out of Nonh America, as well a s having
them maintain the balance of power in Europe.26 There is much truth in
this line of argument, but there is an even more imponant reason why
the British-American rivalry ended in 1 900: the United Kingdom no
longer had the power to challenge the United States in the Western
Hemisphere.27
The two principal indicators of potential military might are population
size and industrial might, and the United States was far ahead o f the
United Kingdom on both indicators by 1 900 (see Table 7 . 2 ) . Furthermore,
The Offshore ??lancers 247
the United Kingdom had to project power across the Atlantic Ocean into
the Western Hemisphere. whereas the United States was physically located
there. The U . S .-U.K. security competition was over. Even if there had
been no German threat in the early twentieth century. the United
Kingdom would almost surely have abandoned the Western Hemisphere
to its offspring, which had definitely come of age by then.
The Monroe Doctrine
American policymakers in the nineteenth century were not just concerned
with t u rning the United States into a powerful territorial state. they were
also deeply committed to getting the European powers out of the Western
Hemisphere and keeping them out.28 Only by doing that could the United
States make itself the region's hegemon. highly secure from great-power
threats. As the United States moved across Nonh America, it gobbled up
territory that previously had belonged to the United Kingdom, France, and
Spain. thus weakening their influence in the Western Hemisphere. But it
also used the Monroe Doctrine for that same purpose.
The Monroe Doctrine was laid out for the first time in President James
Monroe's annual message to Congress on December 2, 1 8 2 3 . He made
three main points about American foreign policy." First, Monroe stipulated
that the United States would not get involved in Europe's wars, in
keeping with George Washington's advice in his famous "farewell
address" ( this policy cenainly has not been followed in the twentieth century
) . '‘ Second, he put the European powers on notice that they could
not acquire new territory in the Western Hemisphere to increase the size
of their already considerable empires. "The American Continents, ， the
president said, ?are hencefonh not to be considered as subjects for future
colonization b y any E u ropean Power. ? But the policy did not call for dismembering
the E u ropean empires already established in the Western
Hemisphere . " Third. the United States wanted to make sure that the
European powers did not form alliances with the independent states of
the Western H emisphere o r control them in any way. Thus. Monroe stated
that "with the Governments who have declared their independence and
248 T H I T R A G I D Y or G R I A T P O W I R P O L I T I C S
maintained i t . . . w e could not view any interposition for the purpose of
oppressing them. or controlling in any other manner their destiny, by any
European power in any other light than as the manifestation of an
unfriendly disposition towards the United States. "
T A I L I 7 . 2
T h e United Kingdom ond t h e United States,
1 800-1 900
Relative share of world wealth
1 800
United Kingdom
United States
na
na
Population (in thousands)
1 800
United Kingdom
United States
NOTE: na = nol available
1 5 , 7 1 7
5. 308
1 130
47%
1 2 %
1 130
24.028
1 2 ,866
1 850
59%
1 5 %
1 850
27. 369
2 3 . 1 92
1 880
4 5 %
2 3 %
1 880
3 4 , 8 8 5
5 0, 1 5 6
1 900
2 3 %
3 8 %
1 900
4 1 . 4 5 9
7 5 . 9 9 5
SOURCES: Figures f o r world wealth a r e from Table 6.2. Population figures f o r the United
Kingdom are from B . R . Mitchell. Abscracr to British Historical Statistics ( Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. 1 962 ) . pp. 6-8; 1he figure for 1 800 is from the 1801 census, which includes
England Wales, Scotland and Ireland. All figures for the United States are from Mitchell.
lnttrnational Historical Statistics: Tht Amtricas. p. 4.
It is understandable that the United States would worry in the early
1 800s about funher European colonization. The United Kingdom. for
example. was a powerful country with a rich history of empire-building
around the globe, and the United States was not powerful enough at the
time to check the British everywhere in the Western Hemisphere. indeed.
Th? Ofhhor? Balanc?rs 249
the United States probably did not have sufficient military might to
enforce the Monroe Doctrine in the first decades after it was enunciated.
Nevertheless, this problem proved illusory, as the European empires shriv，
elled away over the course of the nineteenth century and no new ones
rose in their place. 12 The United States actually had little to do with the
collapse of those empires, which were wrecked mainly from within by
nationalism.n Brazilians, Canadians. and Mexicans, like the American
colonists in 1 776, did not want Europeans controlling their politics, so
they followed the U . S . example and became independent states.
The real danger that the United States faced in the nineteenth centu，
ry-and continued to face in the twentieth century-was the possibility of
an anti，American pact between a European great power and a state in the
Western Hemisphere. An alliance like that might ultimately be powerful
enough to challenge U . S . hegemony in the Americas, which would
adversely affect the country's security. Thus. when Secretary of State
Olney sent his famous note to Lord Salisbury in the summer of 1 89 5 , he
emphasized that "'the safety and welfare of the United States are so con，
cerned with the maintenance of the independence of every American
state as against any European power as to justify and require the interpo，
sition of the United States whenever that independence is endangered. " 14
The United States was able to deal with this threat when it arose during
the nineteenth century. For example, France placed an emperor on the
throne of Mexico during the American Civil War, but French and Mexican
troops together were not a serious threat to the United States, even
though it was fighting a bloody internal conflict. When that war ended.
the nationalist forces of Benito Juarez and the United States army forced
France to withdraw its troops from Mexico. The United States grew more
powerful between 1 86 5 and 1 900, making it increasingly difficult for any
European great power to forge an anti，American alliance with an inde，
pendent state in the Western Hemisphere. Nevenheless. the problem has
not gone away. In fact. the United States had to deal with it three times in
the twentieth century: German involvement in Mexico during World War
I. German designs on South America during World War II. and the Soviet
Union's alliance with C uba during the Cold War."
250 T H I T R A G E D T OF G R E AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
T h e Strateg ic Imperative
The stunning growth of the United States in the hundred years after 1 800
was fueled in good part by realist logic.16 "The people of the United States
have learned," Olney wrote at the end of the nineteenth century, that
"the relations of states to each other depend not upon sentiment nor principle,
but upon selfish interest. "17 Moreover, American leaders understood
that the more powerful their country was, the more secure it would be in
the dangerous world of international politics. President Franklin Pierce
made the point in his inaugural address on March 4, 1 8 5 3 : "It is not to be
disguised that our attitude as a nation and our position on the globe render
the acquisition of certain possessions not within our jurisdiction eminently
important for our protection . " 18
Of course, Americans had other motives for expanding across the continent.
For example, some had a powerful sense of ideological mission. 19
They believed that the United States had created a virtuous republic that
was unprecedented in world history and that its citizens had a moral duty
to spread its values and political system far and wide. Others were driven
by the promise of economic gain, a powerful motor for expansion.40 These
other motives, however, did not contradict the security imperative; in fact,
they usually complemented it.41 This was especially true for the economic
motive: because economic might is the foundation of military might, any
actions that might increase the relative wealth of the United States would
also enhance its prospects for survival. On idealism, there is no question
that many Americans fervently believed that expansion was morally justified.
But idealist rhetoric also provided a proper mask for the brutal policies
that underpinned the tremendous growth of American power in the
nineteenth century.42
Balance-of-power politics had a rich history in the Western Hemisphere
even before the United States declared its independence in 1 77 6 . 4 1 In particular,
the British and the French waged an intense security competition
in North America during the middle of the eighteenth centu ry, including
the deadly Seven Years' War ( 1 7 56--{) 3 ) . Moreover, the United States ultimately
achieved its independence by going to war against Great B ritain
The Offshore aalancera 251
and making an alliance with France. Britain's arch-rival. James Hutson
has it right when he says, "The world the American Revolutionary leaders
found themselves in was a brutal. amoral cockpit . . . . [It] was, above all, a
world in which power was king."44 Thus, the elites who managed U . S .
national security policy in t h e decades after t h e country's independence
were steeped in realist thinking.
The politics of the Western Hemisphere in 1 800 provided good reasons
for those elites to continue thinking in terms of the balance of power. The
United States was still operating in a dangerous neighborhood. The British
and Spanish empires surrounded it on three sides, making fear of encirclement
a common theme among American policymakers, who also worried
that Napoleonic France, the most powerful state in Europe, would try
to build a new empire in North America. Of course, the French empire
never materialized, and indeed, France sold the huge Louisiana Territory
to the United States in 1 80 3 .
Nevertheless, t h e E uropeans, especially t h e British, were determined t o
do w h a t t h e y could to contain t h e United States a n d prevent it from further
expanding its borders." The United Kingdom actually succeeded at
stopping the United States from conquering Canada in the War of 1 8 1 2 .
The United Kingdom had few good options for preventing the westward
expansion o f the United States, but it did form brief alliances with the
Native Americans of the Great Lakes region between 1 807 and 1 8 1 5, and
later with Texas when it was briefly an independent state.46 But these
efforts never seriously threatened to stop the United States from reaching
the Pacific Ocean.
In fact, it appears that any move a European state made to contain the
United States had the opposite effect: it strengthened the American imperative
t o expand. For example, Europeans began speaking openly in the
early 1 840s about the need to maintain a "balance of power， in North
America. a e u phemism for containing further American expansion while
increasing the relative power of the E u ropean empires." The subject was
broached before the United States expanded westward beyond the
Louisiana Territory. Not surprisingly. it immediately became a major issue
in U.S. politics, although there was not much disagreement among
252 T H I T R A G I D T OP G R E AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
Americans o n the issue. President James Polk surely spoke for most
Americans when he said that the concept of a balance of power "cannot
be permitted to have any application to the Nonh American continent,
and especially to the United States. We must ever maintain the principle
that the people of this continent alone have the right to decide their own
destiny. "411 Shonly after Polk spoke on December 2, 1 845, Texas was incorporated
into the United States, soon to be followed by the Oregon
Territories. California, and the other land taken from Mexico in 1 848.
The historian Frederick Merk succinctly summarizes American security
policy in the nineteenth century when he writes, "The chief defense problem
was the British. whose ambition seemed to be to hem the nation in.
On the periphery of the United States, they were the dangerous potential
aggressors. The best way to hold them off was to acquire the periphery.
This was the meaning of the Monroe Doctrine in the age of Manifest
Destiny. "49
T H E U N I T E D STAT E S A N D E U R O P E , 1 9 0 0 - 1 9 9 0
Offensive realism predicts that the United States will send its army
across the Atlantic when there is a potential hegemon in Europe that
the local great powers cannot contain by themselves. Otherwise. the
United States will shy away from accepting a continental commitment. The
movement of American forces into and out of Europe between 1 900 and
l 990 fits this general pattern of offshore balancing. A good way to grasp
the broad outlines of American military policy toward Europe is to describe
it during the late nineteenth century and in five distinct periods of the
twentieth century.
The United States gave hardly any thought to sending an army to
Europe between 1 8 5 0 and l 900, in pan because staying out of E u rope's
wars was deeply ingrained in the American psyche by 1 8 5 0 . Presidents
George Washington and James Monroe, among others, had made sure of
that. ??‘ Funhennore, the United States was concerned primarily with
establishing hegemony in the Western Hemisphere during the second half
The Off1hor? Balancers 253
of the nineteenth century. But most important, the United States did not
contemplate sending troops across the Atlantic because there was no
potential hegemon in Europe at that time. Instead, there was a rough balance
of power on the continent.'1 France, which made a run at hegemony
between 1 792 and 1 8 1 5. was on the decline throughout the nineteenth
century. while Germany. which would become a potential hegemon in
the early twentieth century. was not powerful enough to overrun Europe
before 1 900. Even if there had been an aspiring European hegemon, however,
the United States surely would have adopted a buck-passing strategy.
hoping that the other great powers in Europe could contain the threat.
The first period in the twentieth century covers the time from 1 900 to
April 1 9 1 7 . It was apparent in the early years of the new century that
Germany was not simply the most powerful state in Europe but was
increasingly threatening to dominate the region.52 In fact, Germany predpitated
a number of serious diplomatic crises during that period, cuhninating
i n the outbreak of World War I on August I, 1 9 1 4 . Nevenheless. no
American troops were sent to Europe to thwan German aggression. The
United States pursued a buck-passing strategy instead, relying on the Triple
Entente-the United Kingdom. France, and Russia-to contain Germany.n
The second period runs from April 1 9 1 7 until 1 92 3 ; it covers American
participation in World War I. which was the first time in its history that
the United States sent troops to fight in Europe. The United States
declared war against Germany on April 6, 1 9 1 7, but was able to send only
four divisions to France by the end of that year. 54 However, large numbers
of American troops staned arriving on the continent in early 1 9 1 8, and b y
the time the war e n d e d on November I I , 1 9 1 8, there were a b o u t t w o
million American soldiers stationed i n Europe a n d more on their way.
indeed, General John Pershing. the head of the American Expeditionary
Force. expected to have more than four million troops under his command
by July 19 19 . Most of the troops sent to Europe were brought home
soon after the war ended. although a small occupation force remained in
Germany until January 19 23 . "
The United States entered World War I in good pan because it thought
that Germany was gaining the upper hand on the Triple Entente and was
254 T H I T R A G E D Y Of O R I A T P O W E R P O L I T I C S
likely t o win the war and become a European hegemon. 16 America's
buck-passing strategy, in other words, was unraveling after two and a
half years of war. The Russian army, which had been badly mauled in
almost every engagement it had with the German army, was on the
verge of disintegration by March 12, 1 9 1 7, when revolution broke out
and the tsar was removed from power. 57 The French army was also in
precarious shape, and it suffered mutinies in May 1 9 1 7, shortly after the
United States entered the war. 58 The British army was in the best shape
of the three allied armies, mainly because it spent the first two years of
the war expanding into a mass army and thus had not been bled white
like the French and Russian armies. The United Kingdom was nevertheless
in desperate straits by April 1 9 1 7, because Germany had launched an
unrestricted submarine campaign against British shipping in February
1 9 1 7 that was threatening to knock the United Kingdom out of the war
by the early fall. 59 Consequently, the United States was forced to enter
the war in the spring of 1 9 1 7 to bolster the Triple Entente and prevent a
German victory. 60
The third period covers the years from 1 92 3 to the summer of 1 940.
The United States committed no forces to Europe during those years.
Indeed. isolationism was the word commonly used to describe American
policy during the years between the world wars.61 The 1 920s and early
1 9 30s were relatively peaceful years in Europe, mainly because Germany
remained shackled by the strictures of the Versailles Treaty. But Adolf
Hitler came to power on January 30, 1 9 3 3 , and soon thereafter Europe
was in turmoil again. By the late 1 9 30s, American policymakers recognized
that Nazi Germany was a potential hegemon and that Hitler was
likely to attempt to conquer Europe. World War II began on September L
1 939. when Germany attacked Poland and the United Kingdom and
France responded by declaring war against Germany. However. the United
States made no serious move toward a continental commitment when the
war broke out. As in World War I, it initially relied on Europe's other great
powers to contain the German threat. 62
The fourth period covers the five years from the summer of 1 940.
when Germany decisively defeated France and sent the British army back
The Ofhhor? Balancers
home via Dunkirk, until the European half of World War II ended in early
May 1 94 5 . American policymakers had expected the British and French
armies to stop a Wehrmacht offensive on the western front and force a
protracted war of attrition that would sap Germany's military might."
Josef Stalin expected the same outcome, but the Wehrmacht shocked the
world by winning a quick and decisive victory in France.64 With this victory,
Germany was well-positioned to threaten the United Kingdom.
More imponant, however, Hitler could use most of his army to invade
the Soviet Union, because he had no western front to worry about. It was
widely believed in the United Kingdom and the United States that the
Wehnnacht was likely to defeat the Red Army and establish hegemony in
Europe." Alter all, Germany had knocked Russia out of World War I. and
in that case Germany was fighting a two-front war and had substantially
more divisions fighting against the British and French armies than against
the Russian army.66 This time the Germans would be essentially fighting a
one-front war. Also, Stalin's purge of the Red Army between 1 9 3 7 and
1 94 1 had markedly reduced its fighting power. This weakness was on display
in the winter of 1 9 39--40, when the Red Army had trouble defeating
the badly outnumbered Finnish army. In shon, there was ample reason to
think in the summer of 1 940 that Germany was on the threshold of dominating
continental Europe.
The collapse of France precipitated a dramatic change in American
thinking about a continental commitment.67 Suddenly there was widespread
support for providing substantial aid to the United Kingdom,
which now stood alone against Germany, and for preparing the American
military for a possible war with Germany. By early fall of 1 940, public
opinion polls showed that for the first time since Hitler came to power, a
majority of Americans believed it was more important to ensure that the
United Kingdom defeat Germany than to avoid a European war.68 The
U . S . Congress also drastically increased defense spending in the summer
of 1 940, making it possible to stan building an expeditionary force for
Europe: on June 30, 1 940. the size of the American army was 267,767:
one year later, roughly five months before Pearl Harbor, the strength of
the army had grown to 1 .460, 998."
256 T H E T R A G E D Y OF G R E AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
Furthermore, with the passage o f the Lend-Lease Act o n March 1 1 ,
l 94 1 , the United States began sending large amounts of war material to
the British. It is hard to disagree with Edward Corwin's claim that this step
was "'a qualified declaration of war" against Germany.70 During the summer
and fall of 1 94 1 , the United States became more deeply involved in
helping the United Kingdom win its fight with Germany, reaching the
point in mid-September where President Franklin Roosevelt instructed
the U.S. navy to fire on sight at German submarines in the Atlantic Ocean.
The United States did not formally go to war against Germany, however,
until December l L 1 94 1 , when Hitler declared war against the United
States four days after the Japanese attack at Pearl Harbor. American troops
did not set foot on the European continent until September 1 943, when
they landed in Italy. 71
The fifth period covers the Cold War, which ran from the summer of
1 945 to 1 990. The United States planned to bring most of its troops home
immediately after World War II ended, leaving just a small occupation force
behind to police Germany for a few years, as it had after World War 1.72
By 1 9 50, there were only about 80,000 American troops left in Europe,
and they were mainly involved with occupation duty in Germany.71 But
as the Cold War intensified in the late 1 940s, the United States formed the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( 1 949) and eventually made a commitment
to remain in Europe and substantially increase its fighting forces
on the continent ( 1 9 5 0 ) . By 1 9 5 3 , 427,000 American troops were stationed
in Europe, which was the high-water mark for the Cold War. The
United States also deployed about seven thousand nuclear weapons on
European soil during the 1 9 50s and early 1 960s. Although there was
some variation over time in American troop levels in Europe, the number
never dipped below 300,000.
The United States reluctantly kept military forces in Europe after World
War II because the Soviet Union controlled the eastern two-thirds of the
continent and it had the military might to conquer the rest of Europe.74
There was no local great power that could contain the Soviet Union:
Germany was in ruins and neither France nor the United Kingdom had
the military wherewithal to stop the mighty Red Army, which had just
The Offshore B a l a n c e n 2 5 7
crushed the same Wehrmacht that had easily defeated the British and
French armies in 1 940. Only the United States had sufficient military
power t o prevent Soviet hegemony after 1 945, so American troops
remained in E urope throughout the Cold War.
T H E U N I T E D S T AT E S A N D N O R T H E A S T A S I A , 1 9 0 0 - 1 9 9 0
The movement o f American troops across the Pacific i n the twentieth
century follows the same pattern of offshore balancing that we saw at
work in E u rope. A good way to understand U.S. military policy toward
Nonheast Asia is to divide the years from 1 900 to 1 990 into four periods,
and describe the practice in each of them.
The first period covers the initial three decades of the twentieth century,
during which there was no large-scale commitment of American forces
to Northeast Asia .75 There were, however, small contingents of U . S . military
forces in Asia during this period. The United States maintained a
small contingent of forces in the Philippine Islands,76 and it also sent five
thousand troops to China in 1 900 to help put down the Boxer Rebellion
and maintain the infamous " Open Door" policy. As John Hay, the
American secretary of state, candidly noted at the time, "the inherent
weakness of our position is this: we do not want to rob China ourselves,
and our public opinion will not permit us to interfere. with an army. to
prevent others from robbing her. Besides, we have no army. The talk of
the papers about 'our preeminent moral position giving us the authority
to dictate to the world' is mere flap-doodle. "77 A contingent of approximately
o n e thousand U . S . soldiers was deployed to Tientsin, China. from
January 1 9 1 2 t o March 1 9 3 8 . Finally, U.S. navy gunboats were on patrol
in the region d u ring this period.78
The United States did not send a large army to Northeast Asia because
there was n o potential hegemon in the area. China played an important
role in t h e region's politics, but it was not a great power and it hardly
threatened t o dominate Northeast Asia. The United Kingdom and France
were important actors in Asia in the early twentieth century, but they
258 T H I T R A G I D Y OP G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
were interlopers from a distant continent, with all the power-projection
problems that role entails. Moreover, they were concerned with containing
Germany during most of this period, so most of their attention was
focused on Europe at the expense of Northeast Asia. Japan and Russia
were candidates for potential hegemon in Nonheast Asia, because each
was a great power located in the region. But neither fit the bill.
Japan possessed the most formidable army in the region between 1 900
and 1 9 30. It soundly defeated the Russian army in the Russo-Japanese
War ( 1 904-5 ) .79 Russia's army went from bad to worse during World War
I, finally disintegrating in 1 9 1 7. The newly created Red Anny was essentially
a paper tiger throughout the 1 920s. Meanwhile. the Japanese army
remained an impressive fighting force.'‘ But Japan was not a potential
hegemon because Russia was the wealthiest state in the region. For example.
Russia controlled 6 percent of world industrial might in 1 900, while
Japan did not even control I percent (see Table 6.2 ) . B y 1 9 1 0, Russia's
share had shrunk to 5 percent. while Japan's share had grown to 1 percent-
stiU a substantial Russian lead. Italy was actually Japan's closest economic
competitor in these years. Japan briefly overtook the Soviet Union
in 1 92 0-2 percent vs. 1 percent-but that was only because the Soviet
Union was in the midst of a catastrophic civil war. B y 1 9 30, Russia controlled
6 percent of world industrial might, while Japan controlled 4 percent.
In short, Japan was not powerful enough during the early decades of
the twentieth century to drive for supremacy in Nonheast Asia.
The second period covers the decade of the 1 9 30s, when Japan went
on a rampage on the Asian mainland. Japan conquered Manchuria in
1 9 3 1 , which it turned into the puppet state of Manchukuo. In 1 9 37.
Japan went to war against China; its aim was to conquer northern China
and key Chinese coastal regions. Japan also initiated a series of border
conflicts with the Soviet Union in the late I 930s with the clear intention
of making territorial gains at the expense of Moscow. Japan seemed bent
on dominating Asia.
The United States did not move troops to Asia in the 1 9 30s because,
Japan's grand ambitions notwithstanding, it was not a potential hegemon
and China, Prance, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom were capaThe
Offshore Balancers 259
ble of containing the Japanese army. The Soviet Union actually gained a
significant power advantage over Japan during that decade, mainly
because the Soviet Union underwent rapid industrialization after the first
Five- Year Plan was put into effect in 1 928. The Soviet Union's share of
world wealth climbed from 6 percent in 1 9 30 to 1 3 percent in 1 940, while
Japan's went from 4 percent to 6 percent over the same period ( see Table
6 . 2 ) . Funhermore, the Red Army developed into an efficient lighting
force in the 1 9 30s. Indeed, it played a critical role in containing Japan,
inflicting defeats on the Japanese army in 1 9 38 and 1 939.81
The United Kingdom and China also helped check Japan in the 1 9 30s.
The United Kingdom was actually inclined to pull most of its forces out of
Asia and strike a deal with Japan in the late 1 9 30s, so that it could concentrate
on containing Nazi Germany, which was a more direct and dangerous
threat than was Japan.?2 But the United States, playing the role of
the buck-passer, told the United Kingdom that any diminution of its force
levels in Asia was unacceptable, and that the United Kingdom would have
to remain engaged in Asia and balance against Japan. Otherwise, the
United States might not help it deal with the growing German threat in
Europe. The B ritish stayed in Asia. Although China was not a great power
at the time, it managed to pin down the Japanese army in a costly and
protracted war that Japan was unable to win.u In fact, Japan's experience
in C hina between 1 9 3 7 and 1 94 5 bears considerable resemblance to the
American experience in Vietnam ( 1 96 5-7 2 ) and the Soviet experience in
Afghanistan ( 1 979--8 9 ) .
T h e third period covers t h e years between 1 940 a n d 1 94 5 , when Japan
suddenly became a potential hegemon because of events in E urope . The
fall of France in June 1 940 and the German invasion of the Soviet Union
in June 1 94 1 funadamentally altered the balance of power in Nonheast
Asia. Germany's quick and decisive victory over France in the late spring
of 1 940 greatly reduced, ii not eliminated, French influence on Japanese
behavior i n Asia. Indeed, the defeat of France as well as of the
Netherlands left their empires in Southeast Asia vulnerable to Japanese
attack. With France out of the war, the United Kingdom stood alone
against Nazi Germany in the west. B u t the British army was in shambles
260 T H I T R A G E D Y OF G R E A T P O W E R P O L I T I C S
after Dunkirk and the Luftwaffe started pounding British cities i n midJuly
l 940. The United Kingdom also had to contend with fascist Italy in
and around the Mediterranean. In short, the British were hanging on for
dear life in Europe and therefore could contribute little to containing
Japan in Asia.
Nevertheless. the United States made no move to send troops to Asia
in l 940, largely because 1 ) Japan was bogged down in its war with China,
and 2 ) the Soviet Union, which was not involved in the European half of
the conflict at that point, was a formidable balancing force against Japan.
That situation changed drastically when Germany invaded the Soviet
Union on June 22, 1 94 1 . Over the next six months, the Wehrmacht
inflicted a series of staggering defeats on the Red Army. It appeared likely
by the late summer of l 94 1 that the Soviet Union would collapse as
France had the year before. Japan would then be well-positioned to
establish hegemony in Northeast Asia. because it would be the only great
power left in the region. In effect, the European half of World War II was
creating a power vacuum in Asia that Japan was ready to fill.
American policymakers were especially worried that Japan would
move northward and attack the Soviet Union from the rear, helping
Germany finish off the Soviet Union. Germany would then be the hegemon
in Europe, while in Northeast Asia, only China would stand in the
way of Japanese hegemony. As offensive realism would predict, the
United States began moving military forces to Asia in the fall of 1 9 4 1 to
deal with the Japanese threat.84 Shortly thereafter, Japan attacked the
United States at Pearl Harbor, guaranteeing that massive American military
forces would move across the Pacific for the first time ever. Their aim
would be to crush Japan before it achieved regional hegemony.
The fourth period covers the Cold War ( 1 94 5-90 ) . The United States
maintained military forces in Asia after World War II for essentially the
same reason it accepted a continental commitment in Europe: the Soviet
Union, which scored a stunning military victory in Manchuria against
Japan's Kwantung Anny in the final days of World War II, was a potential
hegemon in Northeast Asia as well as in Europe, and there were no local
great powers to contain it.85 Japan was in ruins and China. which was not
The Offshore Balancers 261
a great power anyway, was in the midst of a brutal civil war. The United
Kingdom and France were in no position to check the Soviet Union in
Europe, much less in Asia. So the United States had little choice but to
assume the burden of containing the Soviet Union in the Far East.86 The
United States ended up fighting two bloody wars in Asia during the Cold
War, while it fired not a shot in Europe.
B R I T I S H G R A N D S T R A T E G Y, 1 7 9 2 - 1 9 9 0
Like t h e United States, t h e United Kingdom i s separated from the
European continent by a substantial body of water. and it, too, has a
history of sending troops to the continent. The United Kingdom has also
followed an offshore balancing strategy. 87 As Sir Eyre Crowe noted in his
famous 1 907 memorandum about British security policy, .. It has become
almost an historical truism to identify England's secular policy with the
maintenance of this {European] balance by throwing her weight . . . on the
side opposed to the political dictatorship of the strongest single state."88
Moreover, the United Kingdom has consistently tried to get other great
powers to bear the burden of containing potential European hegemons
while it remains on the sidelines for as long as possible. Lord Bolingbroke
succinctly summarized British thinking about when to commit to the continent
in 1 74 3 : " We should take few engagements on the continent, and
never those of making a land war, unless the conjecture be such, that
nothing less than the weight of Britain can prevent the scales from being
quite overturned. "89 This commitment to buck-passing explains in good
part why other states in Europe have referred to the United Kingdom as
"Perfidious Albion" over the past few centuries.
Let u s consider B ritish military policy toward the continent from 1 792,
when the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars started, until the
Cold War ended in 1 990. 90 Those two centuries can be roughly divided
into six periods.
The first period runs from 1 792 until 1 8 1 5 and covers the French
Revolutionary an d Napoleonic Wars in their entirety. France was by far
262 T H I T R A O I D Y OF G R E AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
the most powerful state o n the continent during this period. and i t was
bent on dominating Europe.91 France was an especially aggressive and formidable
great power after Napoleon took over the reigns of power in late
1 799. In fact. by the time Napoleon's armies entered Moscow in the fall of
1 8 1 2, France controlled most of continental Europe. The French drive for
hegemony was ultimately thwarted, however, and the British army
played an important role in bringing down Napoleon. Great Britain
deployed a small army to the continent in 1 793, but it was forced to
remove those forces in 1 79 5 when the coalition arrayed against France
collapsed. Britain placed another army in Holland in August 1 799, but it
was defeated by and surrendered to the French army within two months.
In 1 808, the United Kingdom placed an army in Portugal and Spain that
eventually helped inflict a decisive defeat on the large French forces in
Spain. That same British army helped deliver the final blow against
Napoleon at Waterloo ( 1 8 1 5 ) .
The second period runs from 1 8 1 6 t o 1 904, when the United Kingdom
adopted a policy commonly referred to as "splendid isolation."92 It made
no continental commitment during this period, despite the numerous
great-power wars raging on the continent. Most important, the United
Kingdom did not intervene in either the Austro-Prussian War ( 1 86 6 ) or
the Franco-Prussian War ( 1 870-7 1 ) , which led to the creation of a unified
Germany. The United Kingdom sent no troops to Europe during those
nine decades because there was a rough balance of power on the continent
.91 France, which was a potential hegemon from 1 79 3 until 1 8 1 5, lost
relative power over the course of the nineteenth century, while Germany,
which would become the next potential hegemon in the early twentieth
century, was not yet powerful enough to dominate Europe. In the absence
of a potential hegemon, the United Kingdom had no good strategic reason
to move troops to the European mainland.
The third period runs from 1 90 5 to 1 9 3 0 and was dominated by the
United Kingdom's efforts to contain Wilhelmine Germany. which emerged
as a potential hegemon in the early twentieth century.94 It was apparent
by 1 890 that Germany, with its formidable army, large population, and
dynamic industrial base, was rapidly becoming Europe's most powerful
The Offshore Balancers 263
state. Indeed, France and Russia formed an alliance in 1 894 to contain the
growing threat located between them. The United Kingdom would have
preferred to let France and Russia deal with Germany. But it was clear by
1 90 5 that they could not do the job alone and would need British help.
Not only were the power differentials between Germany and its continental
rivals continuing to widen in Germany's favor, but Russia suffered a
major military defeat in the Russo-Japanese War ( 1 904- 5 ) , which left its
army in terrible shape and in no condition to engage the German army.
Finally, Germany initiated a crisis with France over Morocco in March
1 90 5 , which was designed to isolate France from the United Kingdom and
Russia, thus leaving Germany in a position to dominate Europe.
In response to this deteriorating strategic environment, the United
Kingdom allied with France and Russia between 1 90 5 and 1 907, forming
the Triple Entente. In essence, B ritain made a continental commitment to
deal with the threat of a German hegemon. When World War I broke out
on August 1, 1 9 1 4 , the United Kingdom immediately sent an expeditionary
force to the continent to help the French army thwan the Schlieffen Plan.
As the war progressed, the size of the British expeditionary force grew, until
it was the most formidable Allied army by the summer of 1 9 1 7 . It then
played the main role in defeating the German army in 1 9 1 8." Mosi of the
B ritish a rmy exited the continent shortly after the war ended; a small occupation
force remained in Germany until 1 9 30.9'
The foun h period runs from 1 9 30 to the summer of 1 9 39 and covers the
years when the United Kingdom pursued a Europe policy commonly
referred t o as "'limited liability." It made no continental commitment in the
early 1 9 30s. because Europe was relatively peaceful and there was a rough
balance o f power in the region. Alter Hitler came to power in 1 9 3 3 and
began t o rearm Germany. the United Kingdom made no movr to commit
ground forces t o fight on the continent. Instead, alter much debate, it
decided in D ecember 1 9 3 7 to pass the buck to France to contain Germany.
British policymakers eventually realized, however, that France alone did
not have the military might to deter Hitler, and that in the event of a war,
the United Kingdom would have to send troops to fight Nazi Germany, as it
had done against Napoleonic France and Wilhelmine Germany.
26' T H I T R A G I D T OP G R I A T P O W I R P O L I T I C S
The United Kingdom finally accepted a continental commitment on
March 3 1 . 1 9 39. which marks the beginning of the fifth period. Specifically,
it committed itself to fight with France against Germany if the Wehrmacht
attacked Poland. A week later the United Kingdom gave the same guarantee
to Greece and Romania. When World War II broke out five months
later, British troops were promptly sent to France, as they had been in
World War I. Although the British army was pushed off the continent at
Dunkirk in June I 940, it returned in September 1 943 when it landed with
the American army in Italy. British forces also landed at Normandy in June
1 944 and eventually fought their way into Gennany. This period ended
with the surrender of Germany in early May 1 94 5 .
The final period runs from 1 945 10 1 990 a n d covers t h e C o l d War.9'
With the end of World War II. Britain had planned to move its military
forces off the continent after a brief occupation of Germany. However, the
emergence of the Soviet threat, the fourth potential hegemon to confront
Europe in 1 50 years, forced the United Kingdom to accept a continental
commitment in 1 948. British troops. along with American troops.
remained on the cemral front for the duration of the Cold War.
C O N C L U S I O N
In sum. both the United Kingdom and the United States have consistently
acted as offshore balancers in Europe. Neither of these insular great powers
has ever tried to dominate Europe. It is also clear that American actions
in Nonheast Asia fit the same pattern. All of this behavior. as well as the
U.S. drive for hegemony in the Western Hemisphere during the nineteenth
century. corresponds with the predictions of offensive realism.
This chapter raises two issues that bear mentioning. First, insular
Japan's conquest of large amounts of territory on the Asian mainland in
the first half of the twentieth century might seem to contradict my daim
that the stopping power of water made it almost impossible for the United
Kingdom in the nineteenth century and the United States in the twentieth
century to conquer territory on the European continent. After all, if
The Ofhhore Balancers 26S
Japan was able to project power across the seas separating it from the
Asian continent, why is it that the United Kingdom and the United States
could not do likewise in Europe?
The answer is that the Asian and European mainlands were different
kinds of targets during the periods under discussion. In panicular, the
E uropean continent has been populated by formidable great powers over
the past two centuries, and those states have had both the incentive and
the wherewithal to prevent the United Kingdom and the United States
from dominating their region. The situation confronting Japan in Asia
between 1 900 and 1 94 5 looked quite different: Russia was the only great
power located on the Asian mainland, but it was usually more concerned
with events in Europe than in Asia. Plus, it was a militarily weak great
power for much of that period. Russia's immediate neighbors were feeble
states like Korea and China, which were inviting targets for Japanese
aggression. In shon. the Asian continent was open for penetration from
abroad, which of course is why the European great powers had empires
there. The European continent, on the other hand. was effectively a giant
fonress closed to conquest by distant great powers like the United
Kingdom and the United States.
Second, l argued earlier that great powers are not seriously committed
to maintaining peace but instead aim to maximize their share of world
power. O n this point. it is wonh noting that the United States was not
willing at any point between 1 900 and 1 990 to take on a continental commitment
for the purposes of keeping peace in Europe. No American
troops were sent across the Atlantic to help prevent World War l or to stop
the fighting after war broke out. Nor was the United States willing to
accept a continental commitment to deter Nazi Germany or halt the fighting
after Poland was attacked in September 1 9 3 9 . In both cases. the
United States eventually j oined the light against Germany and helped win
the war and create peace in Europe. But the United States did not fight to
make peace in either world war. Instead, it fought to prevent a dangerous
foe from achieving regional hegemony. Peace was a welcome byproduct
of those endeavors. The same basic point holds for the Cold War:
American military forces were in Europe to contain the Soviet Union, not
266 T H E T R A G E D Y Of G R E AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
t o maintain peace. The long peace that ensued was the happy consequence
of a successful deterrence policy.
We find a similiar story in Northeast Asia. The United States did not
intervene with force to shut down the Russo-Japanese War ( 1 904- 5 ) , nor
did it send troops to Northeast Asia in the 1 9 3 0s, when Japan took the
offensive on the Asian mainland, conquering Manchuria and large portions
of China in a series of brutal military campaigns. The United States
began making serious moves to get militarily involved in Asia during the
summer of 1 94 1 , not because American leaders were determined to bring
peace to the region, but because they feared that Japan would join forces
with Nazi Germany and decisively defeat the Red Army, making hegemons
of Germany in Europe and Japan in Northeast Asia. The United
States fought a war in the Far East between 1 94 1 and 1 94 5 to prevent
that outcome. As in Europe, American troops were stationed in Northeast
Asia during the Cold War to prevent the Soviet Union from dominating
the region, not to keep peace.
I have emphasized that when offshore balancers like the United
Kingdom and the United States confront a potential hegemon in Europe
or Northeast Asia they prefer to buck-pass to other great powers rather
than directly confront the threat themselves. Of course, this preference for
buck-passing over balancing is common to all great powers, not just offshore
balancers. Chapter 8 will consider how states choose between these
two strategies.
E I G H T
Balancing versus
Buck-Passing
I argued in Chapter 5 that balancing and buck-passing are the main
strategies that states employ to defend the balance of power against
aggressors, and that threatened states feel a strong impulse to buckpass.
Buck-passing is preferred over balancing because the successful
buck-passer does not have to fight the aggressor if deterrence fails. In fact,
the buck-passer might even gain power if the aggressor and the buckcatcher
get bogged down in a long and costly war. This offensive feature of
buck-passing notwithstanding, there is always the possibility that the
aggressor might win a quick and decisive victory and shift the balance of
power in its favor and against the buck-passer.
This chapter has three aims. First, I explain when threatened states are
likely to balance and when they are likely to buck-pass. That choice is
mainly a function of the structure of the international system. A threatened
great power operating in a bipolar system must balance against its
rival because there is no other great power to catch the buck. It is in multipolar
systems that threatened states can-and often do-buck-pass. The
amount of buck-passing that takes place depends largely on the magnitude
of the threat and on geography. Buck-passing tends to be widespread
in multipolarity when there is no potential hegemon to contend with, and
when the threatened states do not share a common border with the
267
268 T H E T R A G E D Y OF G R E AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
aggressor. B u t even when there i s a dominating threat, endangered rivals
will still look for opportunities to pass the buck. In general, the more relative
power the potential hegemon controls, the more likely it is that all of
the threatened states in the system will forgo buck-passing and form a balancing
coalition.
Second, I examine the five most intense cases of security competition
in Europe over the past two centuries to test my claims about when
threatened states are likely to buck-pass. Specifically, I consider how the
great powers responded to the four potential hegemons in modem
European history: Revolutionary and Napoleonic France ( 1 789-1 8 1 5 ) ,
Wilhelmine Germany ( 1 890- 1 9 1 4) , Nazi Germany ( 1 9 3 3-4 1 ) , a n d the
Soviet Union ( 1 945-90 ) . 1 I also look at how the European great powers
readed to Otto von Bismarck's effort to unify Germany with the sword
between 1 862 and 1 870. Bismarckian Prussia, however, was not a potential
hegemon. The system was multipolar for all of these cases, save for the
bipolar rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union during the
Cold War. Funhennore, all of these security competitions led to greatpower
wars, except for the conflid between the superpowers.
The evidence from these five cases is largely consistent with my theory
on when states buck-pass and when they balance against aggressors. The
United States, for example, had no choice but to balance against the Soviet
Union during the Cold War, because the system was bipolar. Not surprisingly,
the balancing in this case was more timely and more efficient than
in any of the multipolar cases. There is significa n t variation among
the four multipolar cases, where passing the buck was a n option. B uckpassing
is most evident against Bismarck's Prussia, which is not surprising,
since Prussia is the one aggressor under study that was not a potential
hegemon. Buck-passing is least evident against Wilhelmine Germany,
which had a rather impressive balancing coalition arrayed against it about
seven years before the stan of World War I. There was considerable buckpassing
against Revolutionary France and Nazi Germany in the years
before they went to war in 1 792 and I 9 3 9, respectively. and even after
both were at war. The variation among these cases can be explained in
good part by the relevant distribution of power and b y geography, which
Balancing versus Buck，PaHing 269
facilitated buck-passing against Napoleon and Adolf Hitler, but not against
Kaiser Wilhelm.
Third, I hope to illustrate my claim that threatened states are inclined
to buck-pass rather than balance in the face of aggressors. The discussion
in Chapter 7 of how the United Kingdom and the United States have
always looked to buck-pass when confronted with a potential hegemon in
Europe (or Northeast Asia ) provides substantial evidence of that tendency
among states. However, I address the issue more directly in this chapter by
focusing on five particularly aggressive European states and how their
rivals reacted to them.
My explanation for when states buck-pass is laid out in the next section.
The five cases are then discussed in chronological order, starting with
Revolutionary and Napoleonic France and ending with the Cold War. In
the final section, the findings from the different cases are compared and
contrasted.
W H E N DO S T AT E S B U C K - PA S S ?
When a n aggressor comes o n the scene, a t least one other state will
eventually take direct responsibility for checking it. Balancing
almost always happens. although it is not always successful. This point is
consistent with the logic of buck-passing, which is essentially about who
does the balancing, not whether it gets done. The buck-passer simply wants
someone else t o do the heavy lifting, but it certainly wants the threat contained.
B uck-passing, o n the other hand, does not always occur when an
aggressor threatens to upset the balance of power. Passing the buck may be
the strategy o f choice for threatened great powers, but it is not always a
viable option. The task here is to determine when buck-passing makes good
strategic sense.
The prospects for buck-passing are largely a function of the particular
architecture o f the system. What matters most is the distribution of power
among the major states, and geography.' Power is usually distributed
among great powers i n three ways. 1 Bipolar systems are dominated b y
270 T H I T R A G E D Y OF G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
two great powers o f roughly equal military might. Unbalanced multipolar
systems contain three or more great powers, one of which is a potential
hegemon. Balanced multipolar systems have no aspiring hegemon;
instead, power is divided rather evenly among the great powers, or at
least between the two most powerful states in the system.
No buck-passing takes place among the great powers in bipolarity
because there is no third party to catch the buck. A threatened great
power has little choice but to balance against its rival great power. It is also
not possible to form balancing coalitions with other great powers in a
world with just two great powers. Instead, the threatened power has to
rely mainly on its own resources, and maybe alliances with smaller states,
to contain the aggressor. Because neither buck-passing nor great-power
balancing coalitions are feasible in bipolarity, we should expect balancing
in this kind of system to be prompt and efficient.
Buck-passing is always possible in multipolarity, because there is
always at least one potential buck-catcher in the system. B u t buck-passing
is likely to be rife in balanced multipolar systems, mainly because no
aggressor is powerful enough-by definition-to defeat all of the other
great powers and dominate the entire system. This means that not every
great power is likely to be directly threatened by an aggressor in a counterpoised
system, and those that are not in imminent danger of attack will
almost certainly opt to pass the buck. States that are directly threatened
by the aggressor are likely to try to get another threatened state to handle
the problem, so that they can remain unscathed while the buck-catcher
defends the balance of power. In short, balancing coalitions are u nlikely to
form against an aggressor when power is distributed rather evenly among
the major states in a multipolar system.
Buck-passing is less likely in an unbalanced multipolar system, because
the threatened states have a strong incentive to work together to prevent
the potential hegemon from dominating their region. After all, potential
hegemons, which are great powers that clearly have more latent power
and a more formidable army than any other great power i n their region,
have the wherewithal to fundamentally alter the balance o f power in
their favor. Consequently, they are a direct threat t o almost every state in
Balancln9 versus Buck?PaHlng 271
the system. Ludwig Dehio, the German historian, maintains that states
"seem able to hold together only in one event: when a member of their
own circle tries to achieve hegemony," and Barry Posen notes that, "Those
states most often identified as history's would-be hegemons have elicited
the most intense balancing behavior by their neighbors. "4
Nevertheless, buck-passing often occurs in unbalanced multipolar systems.
Threatened states are reluctant to form balancing coalitions against
potential hegemons because the costs of containment are likely to be great;
if it is possible to get another state to bear those costs, a threatened state will
make every effort to do so. The more powerful the dominant state is relative
to its foes, however, the less likely it is that the potential victims will be able
to pass the buck among themselves, and the more likely it is that they will
be forced to form a balancing coalition against the aggressor. Indeed. at
some point, the collective efforts of all the threatened great powers will be
needed to contain an especially powerful state. Buck-passing makes little
sense in such a circumstance because the buck-catchers are unlikely to be
capable of checking the potential hegemon without help.
Whereas the distribution of power tells us how much buck-passing is
likely among the great powers, geography helps identify the likely buckpassers
and buck-catchers in multipolar systems. The crucial issue regarding
geography is whether the threatened state shares a border with the
aggressor, or whether a barrier-be it the territory of another state or a
large body of water-separates those rivals. Common borders promote
balancing; barriers encourage buck-passing.
C o m m o n borders facilitate balancing in two ways. First, they provide
threatened states with direct and relatively easy access to the territory of
the aggressor, which means that the imperiled states are well-positioned
to put military pressure o n their dangerous opponent. II all the threatened
great powers share a border with their common foe, they can readily raise
the specter o f a multi-front war. which is often the most effective way to
deter a powerful aggressor.' O n the other hand, ii a threatened state is
separated from its adversary b y water or a territorial buffer zone, it will be
difficult for the endangered state to use its army to put pressure on the
menacing state. A minor power caught in the middle, !or example. is
272 T H I T R A O I D Y OP O R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
often unwilling t o invite a threatened great power onto its territory, thus
forcing the threatened state to invade the minor power to get at the
aggressor. Projecting power across water is also a difficult task, as discussed
in Chapter 4.
Second, great powers that share a border with an aggressor are likely to
feel particularly vulnerable to attack, and thus they are likely to take matters
into their own hands and balance against their dangerous foe. They
are not likely to be in a good position to buck-pass, although the temptation
to try that strategy will always be present. On the other hand, threatened
states separated from an aggressor by a barrier are likely to feel less
vulnerable to invasion and therefore more inclined to pass the buck to an
endangered state that has a common border with the menacing state.
Thus, among threatened states, those that live next door to the aggressor
usually get stuck with the buck, while those more distant from the threat
usually get to pass the buck. There is some truth to the dictum that geography
is destiny.
In sum, buck-passing among the great powers is impossible in bipolarity,
and not only possible but commonplace in multipolarity. Indeed, buckpassing
is likely to be absent from a multipolar system only when there is
an especially powerful potential hegemon and when there are no barriers
between the aggressor and the threatened great powers. In the absence of
a dominating threat and common borders, substantial buck-passing is
likely in multipolarity.
Let us now consider how well this theory explains the historical record,
focusing first on how the European great powers reacted to the aggressive
behavior of Revolutionary and Napoleonic France some two centuries ago.
R E V O L U T I O N A RY A N D N A P O L E O N I C F R A N C E ( 1 7 8 9 - 1 8 1 5 )
Background
The European great powers were at war almost continuously from 1 792
until 1 8 1 5 . Basically, a powerful and highly aggressive France fought
against different combinations of the other regional great powers: Austria,
lolancln9 veraua luck，Pauin9 273
Great B ritain, Prussia, and Russia. France, which was bent on becoming
E u rope's hegemon. reached its expansionist peak in mid-September 1 8 1 2 ,
when Napoleon's armies entered Moscow. At that point, France controlled
almost all of continental Europe from the Atlantic to Moscow and from
the B altic Sea to the Mediterranean. Less than two years later, however,
France was a defeated great power and Napoleon was exiled to Elba.
There was no balancing against France between the outbreak of the
French Revolution in 1 789 and the outbreak of great-power war in 1 792.
Austria and Prussia actually went to war against Revolutionary France in
1 792 to take advantage of it, not to contain it. France quickly built a powerful
army, however, and it was a potential hegemon by late 1 79 3 .
Nevertheless, it w a s not until 1 8 1 3-more than twenty years after the
fighting began-that all four of France's great-power rivals came together
in a balancing coalition and decisively defeated France. In the intervening
two decades, there was considerable buck-passing as well as inefficient
balancing among France's enemies. In fact, five separate balancing coalitions
formed against France between 1 79 3 and 1 809, but none contained
all of France's rivals and each collapsed after performing poorly on the
battlefield. There were also lengthy periods where Britain fought alone
against France.
The behavior o f France's rivals between 1 7 89 and 1 8 1 5 can be
explained in good part by the distribution of power and by geography.
Hardly any balancing took place against France before 1 7 9 3 because it
was n o t a potential hegemon. Although France became a threat to dominate
E u ro p e i n late 1 7 9 3 , there was a good deal of buck-passing by
Austria, Great B ritain, Prussia, and Russia over the next twelve years,
mainly because France, although powerful, was not so powerful that all
four of its rivals were needed t o prevent it from overruning the continent.
B y 1 80 5 , however, the French army had become such a formidable
fighting force under Napoleon that only the collective efforts of all
the other E u ropean great powers could contain it. Yet those powers did
not contain it until 1 8 1 3, in small part because the buck-passing impulse
remained at play, but mainly because of inefficient balancing. In particu lar,
Napoleon quickly knocked Austria out of the balance of power in
274 T H I T R A G I D Y OP G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
1 80 5 , and then did the same t o Prussia i n 1 806, making i t impossible for
his foes to form a unified balancing coalition. That situation changed in
late 1 8 1 2 when France suffered a catastrophic defeat in Russia. With
France temporarily weakened, Austria, the United Kingdom, Prussia,
and Russia were able to join together in 1 8 1 3 and bring France's run at
hegemony to an end.
The Strategic Behavior of the Great Powers
A good way to analyze great-power behavior in Europe between 1 789 and
1 8 1 5 is to start with a brief description of the various targets of French
aggression. and then look at the interactions between France and its rivals
in four distinct periods: 1 789-9 1 , 1 792- 1 804, 1 80 5 - 1 2 , 1 8 1 3- 1 5 . '
France sought t o conquer territory a l l across Europe, although it tended
to work its way from west to east over time. Its main targets in western
Europe were Belgium. which Austria controlled in 1 792; the Dutch
Republic; the various German political entities opposite France's eastern
border, such as Bavaria, Hanover, and Saxony, which I refer to throughout
this chapter as the "Third Germany"'; Switzerland; the Italian
Peninsula, especially the northern pan; Portugal and Spain on the Iberian
Peninsula; and Great B ritain. France occupied all of those areas at one
point or another, save for Britain, which Napoleon planned to invade but
never did. In central Europe. France's main targets were Austria, Prussia,
and Poland, which was dominated at the time by Austria, Prussia, and
Russia. There was one big target in eastern Europe: Russia (see Map 8 . 1 ) .
The French Revolution, which broke out i n the summer o f I 789, did
not cause France to launch wars to spread its ideology. Nor did it cause
Europe's other great powers to wage war against France to crush the revolution
and restore the monarchy. In fact, there was peace among the great
powers until the spring of 1 792, when Austria and Prussia provoked a war
with France. But that conflict was motivated mainly b y balance-of-power
considerations, although it was not a case of two threatened states balancing
against a mighty France.? On the contrary, A ustria and Prussia were
ganging up on a weak and vulnerable France to gain power at its expense.
Europe at the Height of
Napoleon's Power, 1 8 1 0
?? French Empire
- Sotell ;tes
?? Subordinate Allies
C:=J Independent Adversories
of France
M A P 8 . 1
R U S S I A N
E M P I R E
Mediterranean Sea
276 T H E T R A G I D Y Of G R E AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
Britain was content t o sit o n the sidelines and watch this happen, while
Russia encouraged Austria and Prussia to fight with France, so that it
could make gains in Poland at their expense.
France fared poorly in the opening months of the war, prompting a reorganization
and enlargement of the French army in the summer of 1 792. It
then won a stunning victory against the invading Prussians at Valmy on
September 20. 1 792. Soon thereafter, France went on the offensive and it
remained a relentless and formidable aggressor until Napoleon's final
defeat at Waterloo in June 1 8 1 5 .
During the period from 1 793 t o 1 804, France did not attempt t o conquer
all of Europe. Instead, it sought and achieved hegemony in western
Europe. In panicular, it gained direct control over Belgium, large parts of
Italy. and a portion of the Third Germany. France also dominated the
Dutch Republic and Switzerland. But Portugal. Spain. and most important.
Britain. were not brought under French control. These gains in western
Europe were not made quickly and easily. For example, France won
control over Belgium by defeating the Austrians at the B attle of Jemappes
on November 6, 1 792. But the Austrians won it back at the Battle of
Neerwinden on March 1 6, 1 79 3 . France took it back again, however, at
the battle of Fleurus on June 26, I 794.
We find a similiar story in Italy. Between March 1 79 6 and April 1 797,
Napoleon led French armies to victory over the Austrians in northern
Italy. France subsequently gained territory and political influence in Italy
with the Treaty of Campo Formio (October 1 8, 1 79 7 ) , which ended the
fighting between Austria and France. But they were back at war again on
March I 3. 1 799, and by the fall of that year virtually all French forces had
been driven out of Italy. Napoleon returned to Italy in the spring o f 1 800
and defeated the Austrians in a series of battles, winning back control of
much of Italy in the Treaty of Luneville ( February 8, 1 80 1 ) , which ended
that round of fighting.
France not only had limited territorial ambitions between 1 79 3 and
1 804, but also did not make a serious attempt to conquer any o f its greatpower
rivals. France certainly waged successful military campaigns against
Austria, B ritain, Prussia, and Russia, but it did not seriously threaten to
Balancing versus Buck，PaHlng 277
knock any of them out of the balance of power. In effect, France's wars
before 1 80 5 were limited in scope, much like the canonical .,limited wars ..
of the preceeding century, which rarely produced decisive victories that
led to the conquest of one great power by another.'
France's rivals formed two balancing coalitions between 1 79 3 and 1 804,
but there was still substantial buck-passing among those threatened states.
The first coalition was put in place on February l. 1 793, when Britain
j oined with Austria and Prussia to check French expansion in Belgium and
Holland. 10 But Russia did not join the fighting against France, preferring
instead to pursue a bloodletting strategy, where Austria and Prussia would
wear themselves down fighting against France . 1 1 Prussia tired of the fighting
and quit the coalition on April 5 , 1 79 5 , which was tantamount to passing
the buck to Austria and Britain. In fact, Austria wound up catching the
buck, because B ritain's small army could not seriously contest the French
army on the continent, whereas the Austrian army stood a fighting chance
against that powerful aggressor. Austria did not fare well in its subsequent
battles with France, however, and it temporarily quit the war in the fall of
1 797, leaving B ritain to light alone against France.
A second balancing coalition was in place by December 29. 1 798, and
its members were Austria, Britain, and Russia, but not Prussia, which preferred
to continue buck-passing. The coalition won some battles against
France between March and August 1 799, but France turned the tables
and won impressive victories against the coalition in September and
October 1 79 9 . R ussia quit the coalition on October 22, 1 799, leaving
Austria and B ritain to contain France. Again, the burden fell squarely on
Austria, not B ritain. Alter a handful of battlefield defeats by the French
army, A ustria signed a peace treaty with France on February 9, 1 80 1 . The
United Kingdom finally quit lighting on March 2 5 , 1 802, when it signed
the Treaty of Amiens. This was the first time since the spring of 1 792 that
Europe was free o f great - power war. But the peace, which was really just
a n armed truce, lasted only founeen months. Fighting broke out again on
May 1 6, 1 80 3 , when the United Kingdom declared war against France.
B etween 1 80 5 and 1 8 1 2, Napoleon shattered the limited-war mold
that h a d shaped European conflict for the previous century. 1 2 Specifically,
278 T H E T R A G E D Y OF O R I AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
h e sought t o conquer all o f Europe and make France its hegemon. B y the
summer of 1 809, France held firm control over all of central Europe and
it was fighting to conquer Spain and dominate the Iberian Peninsula, the
only area on the western part of the continent that France did not dominate.
U In June 1 8 1 2, France invaded Russia in hopes of winning control
of eastern Europe, too. In pursuit of European hegemony, Napoleon conquered
other great powers and knocked them out of the balance of
power, something that had not happened in the wars fought between
1 792 and 1 804. For example, France decisively defeated and conquered
Austria in 1 80 5 . Prussia met the same fate a year later in 1 80 6 . Austria
briefly came back from the dead in 1 809, but Napoleon's armies decisively
defeated it again. In essence, the United Kingdom and Russia were
France's only two great-power opponents for much of the period
between 1 80 5 and 1 8 1 2 .
Three more balancing coalitions formed against France during this period.
There was some buck-passing for sure, but not as much as there had
been between 1 792 and 1 804. The principal problem that Napoleon's
rivals faced after 1 80 5 was that they were rather inefficient in putting
together a formidable balancing coalition, which allowed Napoleon to
defeat them piecemeal and knock some of them out of the balance. In
short, diplomacy was slower than the sword . 1 4
The third coalition was p u t in place on August 9, 1 80 5 , w h e n Austria
joined forces with the United Kingdom and Russia. Prussia initially opted
to buck-pass and stay outside the alliance, because it seemed at the time
that the combined strength of the three coalition members was sufficient to
contain France, which had not fought a major land battle in E u rope since
late I SOOY In fao, Napoleon had been at peace with his three continental
foes since early 1 80 L although he was still highly aggressive o n the diplomatic
front . ..P eace for Napoleon, " as Paul Schroeder notes, .. was a continuation
of war by other means. " 1 6 Moreover, after the United Kingdom and
France went back to war in the spring of 1 80 3 , Napoleon built a powerful
army to cross the English Channel and invade the U nited Kingdom. La
Grande Armee, as it was called, never attacked the United Kingdom, but
Napoleon used it to attack the third coalition in the fall of 1 80 5 . In the
aalancing versu? Buck-Pauing 279
opening round of the fighting, it inflicted a major defeat on the Austrians
at Ulm (October 20, 1 8 0 5 ) . 17 Prussia, recognizing that France was now a
serious threat to its survival, took steps to join the coalition. Before that
could happen, however, Napoleon defeated the Austrian and Russian
armies at Austerlitz on December 2, 1 80 5 . 18 After its second major defeat in
less than three months, Austria no longer counted as a great power.
Less than a year later, on July 24. l 806, the United Kingdom, Prussia,
and Russia formed a fourth coalition. There was no buck-passing this
time, for Austria was in no shape to join the coalition. But it mattered little:
Napoleon conquered Prussia by winning battles at Jena and Auerstadt
on October 1 4, 1 806. Both Austria and Prussia had now been knocked out
of the ranks of the great powers. After engaging the Russian army in a
bloody stalemate at Eylau (February 8, 1 807), Napoleon smashed it on the
battlefield at Friedland (June 1 4, 1 80 7 ) . Soon thereafter, a badly wounded
Russia signed the Treaty of Tilsit with Napoleon, which ended the lighting
between France and Russia and left France free to wage war against an
isolated United Kingdom. Russia was effectively pursuing a buck-passing
strategy, pushing France to concentrate on fighting the British, while
Russia recovered from its defeats and worked to improve its position in
central Europe.
Napoleon's imposing military triumphs after 1 80 5 account in good part
for Russia's buck-passing, which was the only significant case of buckpassing
in the decade before 1 8 1 5 . Russia passed the buck to the United
Kingdom from 1 807 until 1 8 1 2, not only because Austria and Prussia had
been conquered by France, and thus were unavailable to join a balancing
coalition, but also because the major defeats the Russian army suffered in
1 80 5 and 1 80 7 left it in no position to engage the French army without
allies on the continent. Better to let Britain and France batter each other
while R ussia remained on the sidelines, recovering and waiting for a propitious
shift in the balance of power.
Austria had regained enough strength by the spring of 1 809 to join
with the United Kingdom in a fifth coalition against France. Still smarting
from its defeats in 1 80 5 and 1 807, Russia opted to remain on the sidelines.
Austria fought major battles against Napoleon's armies at Aspem280
T H I T R A O I D T OF O R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
Essling (May 2 1 -22, 1 809) and Wagram (July 5-6, 1 909), b u t again i t was
decisively defeated and conquered. With both Austria and Prussia
removed from the balance of power, Russia was France's only great power
rival on the continent. The Treaty of Tilsit notwithstanding, Napoleon
turned on Russia in June 1 8 1 2, hoping to conquer and eliminate it, too,
from the balance of power. The French army, however, suffered a catastrophic
defeat in Russia between June and December 1 8 1 2 . 1 9 At the same
time, France's position in Spain was deteriorating rapidly. B y early
January 1 8 1 3, Napoleon at last appeared beatable, not invincible.
Not surprisingly, the sixth balancing coalition against France came
together in 1 8 1 3 . Prussia, which was given a desperately needed reprieve by
Napoleon's debacle in Russia, formed an alliance with Russia on February
26, 1 8 1 3, and then went to war against France less than a month later, on
March 1 7, 1 8 1 3 . The United Kingdom joined the coalition on June 8, 1 8 1 3,
and Austria followed suit, declaring war against France on August l l, 1 8 1 3 .
For the first time since fighting broke out i n 1 792, all four o f France's greatpower
rivals were allied together in a balancing coalition.20
Despite defeat in Russia and the emergence of a powerful enemy coalition,
Napoleon was determined to keep fighting. ln 1 8 1 3, war was waged
for control of the Third Germany (now called the "Confederation of the
Rhine " ) , which France had dominated for almost a decade. French forces
won some impressive victories at Lutzen and Bautzen in May 1 8 1 3 and
even fared well through the summer of 1 8 1 3, winning a major battle at
Dresden on August 26-27, 1 8 1 3 . But France's successes were due in good
pan to the fact that the sixth coalition was still in the process of coming
together. In mid-October 1 8 1 3, when the coalition was finally in place,
Napoleon encountered formidable Austrian, Prussian. and Russian armies
at the Battle of Leipzig. France suffered another devastating defeat and
lost Germany for good.
By the end of 1 8 1 3, France's rivals were invading its territory; the fight
in 1 8 1 4 would be for France itself. Napoleon's armies performed surprisingly
well in some key battles in February 1 8 1 4, but despite strains in the
balancing coalition, it held together and routed the French army in March,
causing Napoleon to abdicate on April 6, 1 8 1 4.2 1 He was eventually exiled
aalancin9 versus auck，Pouing 281
to Elba, from which he escaped back to France in early March 1 8 1 5 . The
sixth coalition immediately reconstituted itself on March 25, 1 8 1 5, and
defeated Napoleon for the final time at Waterloo on June 1 8, 1 8 1 5 .
France's run a t hegemony was over.
T h e C a l c u l u s of Power
It is difficult to establish firmly that France had more latent power than
any of its great-power rivals, mainly because there are not much reliable
data on population and especially wealth for the period between 1 792 and
1 8 1 5 . Still, when you consider what is known about those building blocks
of military power, there is reason to think that France had more potential
power than any other European state.
Although hardly any comparative data on overall state wealth can be
found for the Napoleonic period, scholars generally agree that Great
B ritain and France were the richest states in the international system. A
good indicator of Britain's great wealth is the fact that Britain provided
large subsidies to Austria, Prussia, and Russia so that they could build
armies that could defeat France, which was certainly not being subsidized
by the B ritish or anyone else. The relative wealth of Britain and France is
difficult to establish, but there are reasons to think that France was
wealthier than B ritain, although certainly not by much, for the period in
question.22 For example, France had a much larger population than
B ritain did in 1 800-28 versus 16 million (see Table 8. 1 )-and given two
prosperous economies, the one with the larger population is more likely
to possess greater overall wealth. Furthermore, like Nazi Germany, France
garnered considerable wealth from its occupation and exploitation of
much o f E u rope. One scholar estimates that "Napoleon's conquests provided
the French treasury with 10 to 1 5 per cent of its annual revenue
from 1 80 5 onwards. "2l
Turning to population size, France appears to have had an advantage
over its rivals, too. The population figures for 1 800 and 1 8 1 6 in Table 8 . l
show that the French outnumbered the British by about I . 5: I and the
Prussians by almost 3 : 1 ." But the French did not outnumber either the
282 T H I T R A G I D T Of G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
Austrians o r the Russians. France's population was roughly the same size
as Austria's, and it was much smaller than Russia's. Nevertheless. a critical
factor at play effectively shifted the population balance in France's favor in
both the Austrian and the Russian cases.
TA. I L i 8 . 1
Populations of European Great
Powers, 1 750-1 8 1 6 (in millions)
1 750 1 800 1 8 1 6
Austria 1 8 2 8 2 9 . 5
Great Britain 1 0 . 5 1 6 1 9 . 5
France 2 1 . 5 2 8 2 9 . 5
Prussia 9 . 5 1 0 . 3
Russia 20 37 5 1 . 3
SOURCES: Figures for 1 7 50 and 1 800 are from Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great
PMWrs: Economic Chan9e and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000 (New York: Vintage, 1 98 7 ) , p.
99. Figures for 1 8 1 6 are from J. David Singer and Melvin Small. National Material Capabilities
Database. 1 8 1 6- 1 985 (Ann Arbor, Ml: lnter-Universily Consortium for Polilical and Social
Research, February 1 9 9 3 ) .
Population size, as emphasized in Chapter 3 , is an important ingredient
of military power because it affects the potential size of a state's
army.25 Large populations allow for large armies. But rival states sometimes
have markedly different policies regarding who serves in the military,
and in those cases, simple comparisons of population size are not
panicularly useful. This point is relevant for France and its rivals between
1 789 and 1 8 1 5 . Prior to the French Revolution, E u ropean a rmies were
rather small in size and they were composed mainly of foreign mercenaries
and the dregs of a state's society. In the wake of the revolution.
nationalism became a mighty force in France, and it led to the introducBalancing
veuus luck，Pauing 283
tion of the novel concept of the "nation in arms."26 The idea that all per，
sons fit to fight for France should serve the colors was adopted, and
thereby the percentage of the population that French leaders could tap
for military service increased dramatically. Neither Austria nor Russia,
however, was willing to imitate France and adopt the nation-in-arms
concept, which meant that compared to France, a significantly smaller
percentage of their populations was available for military service. Thus,
France was able to raise substantially larger armies than either Austria or
Russia, as discussed below.27
Let us now consider actual military power. France did not have the
most powerful army in Europe from 1 789 to 1 792, and thus it was not a
potential hegemon.2s In terms of numbers alone, Austria, Prussia, and
Russia all had larger armies than did France (see Table 8 . 2 ) . Only Britain
maintained a smaller army than France.29 Funhermore, the French army
did not enjoy a qualitative edge over its rivals. In fact, it was in such disarray
in the years right after the revolution that it was not clear that it could
even protect France against invasion.10 This weakness explains why there
was no balancing against France before 1 793, and why Austria and Prussia
ganged up to attack France in 1 792.
D u ring the summer of 1 792, when the war was going badly for
France, it took steps to transform its army into the most powerful fighting
force in E u rope. B y the early fall of 1 79 3 , that goal was achieved, and
France clearly was a potential hegemon. The French army remained the
preeminent army in Europe from 1 79 3 to 1 804. Nevertheless, when you
consider both relative size and quality, it was not so powerful that all
fou r of its rivals were compelled to ally against it. Instead, its limitations
allowed for considerable buck-passing among France's opponents.
The French army, which had numbered 1 50,000 before war broke out
in April 1 792, tripled in size to 450,000 by November of that year (see
Table 8 . 2 ) , at which point it was the largest army in Europe. But the army
began to shrink in size soon afterward; it was down to 290,000, by
February 1 79 3 , which made it slightly smaller than the Austrian and
Russian armies. However, the famous /evie en masse was put in place on
August 2 3 , 1 79 3 , and the size of the army skyrocketed to 700,000 by
T A. I l l 1 . 2
Manpower i n European Armies, 1 789-1 8 1 5
France
1789 180,000
1790 1 30,000
1791 1 5 0,000
1792 1 5 0.000 (early)
450.000 (Nov.)
179) 290.000 (Feb . )
700.000 (end)
1794 7 32,474
1795 484, 363
1796 396. 0 1 6
1797 3 8 1 . 909
1798 1 2 5 .000
1799 337.000
1800 3 5 5 , 000
1801 350,000
1802 )50,000
180) 400,000
1804 400.000
180, 450,000
1806 500,000
1807 639.000
1808 700.000
1809 750.000
1810 800,000
1 8 1 1 800,000
1812 1.000.000
1811 850,000
1114 356,000
181' )00,000
Austria
300,000
1 50,000
i 300,000
i
Great Britain PruHia
45.000 200,000
1 20,000
j
1 60.000
42,000
2 5 0,000 j j 270,000
i
RuHia
300,000
400,000
500.000
Balanclng verau? Buck，Paulng 285
SOURCES: Figures for the French army are from Jean-Paul Bertaud, The Anny of the French
Revolution, trans. R. R. Palmer (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1 988), pp. 239 (n.
2 ) , 272; Georges Blond, La Grande Annie, trans. Marshall May (London: Arms and Armour
Press, 1 9 9 5 ) , pp. 5 1 0- 1 1 ; David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon (New York:
Macmillan, 1 966), p . H3; Owen Connelly, French Revolution/Napoleonic Era (New York:
Holt, Rinehan, and Wmston, 1 979), p. 240; Roben A. Doughty and Ira D . Gruber, Warfare
in the Western World, vol. I , Military Operations from 1600 to 1871 (Lexington, MA: D . C . Heath,
1 996), p . 2 1 3; John R. Elting. Swords around a Throne: Napoleon's Grande Armie (New York:
Free Press, 1 988), pp. 6 1 , 653; Vmcent J. Esposito and John Robert Elting, A Military History
and Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1 964), p. 35: Alan Forrest,
The Soldiers of the French Revolution (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1 990), p. 82;
Kennedy, Rise and Fall, p . 99; John A. Lynn, The Bayonets of the Republic (Urbana: University
of Illinois Press, 1 984), pp. 48, 53; and Gunther E . Rothenberg. The Art of Warfare in the Ast
of Napoleon (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1 978), pp. 43, 98. Numbers for 1 8 0 1 -2
and 1 8 1 0--1 l are author's estimates. Figures for the other European annies are given in
round numbers based on the following sources: Chandler, Campaigns of Napoleon, pp. 42,
666, 750; Connelly, French Revolution/Napoleonic Era, p. 268; Clive Emsley, The Longman
Companion to Napoleonic Europe (London: Longman, 1993), p. l 38; David French, The British
Way in Warfare, 1688-2000 (London: Unwin Hyman, 1 990), p. 1 07; Charles J. Esdaile, The
Wars of Napoleon (New York: Longman, 1 99 5 ) , p. 18; David R. Jones, ?The Soviet Defence
Burden through the Prism of History,， in Carl G. Jacobsen, ed., The Soviet Dtfena Enigma:
Estimating Costs and Burden (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1 987), p. 1 5 5; Kennedy, Rise
and Fall, p. 99; Evan Luard. The Balance of Powtr: The System of International Relations,
1 648- 1 8 1 5 (New York: St. Martin's, 1 992), p. 37; Walter M. PinUler, Russia as a Great Pqwer:
Reflections on the Problem of Relative Backwardness, with Special Referena to tht Russian Army and
Russian Society, Occasional Paper No. 33 (Washington, DC: Kennan Institute for Advanced
Russian Studies, July 1 8, 1979), p. 29; Rothenberg, Art of Warfare, pp. 1 67, 1 7 1-73, 1 77,
1 88, 1 99; and William O. Shanahan, Prussian Military Reforms, 1 786-1813 (New York: AMS,
1 966), pp. 3 3-34, 1 78, 206, 22 1 .
year's end, making i t overwhelmingly larger than any other European
army. France could not maintain those large numbers, however, and by
1 79 5 , the army had slimmed down to just over 484,000. But it was still
the largest army in Europe. Between 1 796 and 1 804, French army size
fluctuated between a low of 3 2 5 ,000 and a high of 400,000, making it
always larger than the Austrian army ( 300, 000) , but usually not quite as
large as the Russian army (400,000) .
Numbers, however, tell only pan o f the story. The French army gained
an important qualitative advantage over rival land forces when France
became a nation in arms in the summer of 1 792. JI Not only were the
ranks then filled with individuals who were motivated to fight and die for
France, but merit replaced binhright as the principal criterion for selecting
and promoting officers. Furthermore. moving to an army of citizen-soldiers
infused with patriotism permitted the introduction of novel tactics, which
286 T H I T R A G E D Y OF G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
gave French forces a n advantage over their rivals o n the battlefield. I t also
allowed for an army that had greater strategic mobility than either its
predecessor or the rival armies of the day.
Although the French army enjoyed a marked qualitative advantage
over its opponents (who all remained hostile to the nation-in-arms concept)
and was the most powerful army in Europe between 1 79 3 and 1 804,
it had some serious deficiencies. In particular, the army was neither welltrained
nor well-disciplined, and it suffered from high desertion rates.
?Messy massive armies," as Geoffrey Best puts it, are what France fought
with before 1 80 5 . "
During the period from 1 805 t o 1 8 1 3, the power gap between the
French army and its rivals widened significantly. Napoleon was largely
responsible for this development. He sharply increased the size of the
French army by refining its conscription system and by integrating large
numbers of foreign troops into its ranks. n Thus, the French army grew
from 450, 000 in 1 805 to 700,000 in 1 808, to 1 million in 1 8 1 2, the year
France invaded Russia. Even alter that debacle, the French army still numbered
850, 000 in 1 8 1 3 . As Table 8.2 makes clear, there was no comparable
increase in the size o! the other European armies between 1 80 5 and 1 8 1 3 .
Napoleon also substantially raised the quality o ! the French army. H e did
not make radical changes in the way the army did business, but instead corrected
many of the "imperfections" in the existing system.34 He improved
training and discipline, !or example, and he also improved coordination
among the infantry, artillery, and cavalry. In short, the French army after
1 8 0 5 was more professional and more competent than its immediate predecessor
had been. Napoleon was also a brilliant military commander, which
gave France a further advantage over its foes. 35 France's rivals made minor
modifications in their armies in response to Napoleon, but only Prussia
adopted the nation-in-arms concept and modernized its army in a fundamental
way." Even so, the small Prussian army was no match for the much
larger French army in a one-on-one engagement.
France's imposing power advantage over each of its rivals from 1 80 5
until 1 8 1 3 explains in large part w h y a l l four of them came together in
1 8 1 3 and then remained together until France was defeated and conlalancln9
versu? luck，PaHlng 287
quered in 1 8 1 5 . One might ask, however, why did that imposing balancing
coalition not come together earlier, say in 1 806 or 1 8 1 O? The main
reason for the delay, as emphasized earlier in this chapter, was that
Napoleon's stunning victories on the battlefield made it impossible for all
four rivals to form an alliance. After Napoleon conquered Austria in late
1 80 5 , there was no time before 1 8 1 3 when all four of France's greatpower
opponents were players in the balance of power. Indeed, for much
of the period, both Austria and Prussia were great powers in name only.
Finally, a word about the impact of geography on buck-passing. Austria
was the only great power that controlled territory abutting France. Austria
and France each shared a border with Italy and the Third Germany. which
both of those great powers highly valued as targets. As a result. Austria
was too threatened by France to opt out of the fighting by passing the
buck. Indeed, it was well-placed to play the unenviable role of buckcatcher.
And it did, as it was surely the most put-upon of France's rivals.17
David Chandler. for example, calculates that among France's rivals on the
continent, Austria was at war with it for I 3 . 5 of the relevant 23 years,
whereas Prussia and Russia were each at war with France for only 5 . 5
years . 18
B ritain. which is separated from the continent by a large body of water.
was the least vulnerable to invasion of France's foes. Yet Britain was at
war with France almost continuously from 1 793 onward. Chandler estimates
that they were locked in conflict for 2 1 . 5 of the relevant 23 years .19
B u t B ritain buck-passed to its continental allies in the sense that it never
raised a powerful army to fight on the continent against France . It preferred
instead t o send small armies to fight in peripheral places like Spain,
while subsidizing its allies to do the brunt of the fighting against the
French army.40 I n shon, Britain's geographical location allowed it to act as
an offshore balancer.
Russia was located on the other end of the continent from France, with
Austria and Prussia in between. So a favorable geographic position
allowed R u ssia to buck-pass. too, especially between 1 79 3 and 1 804,
when France was mainly concerned with winning hegemony in western
Europe.41 I n fact, Russia was at war with France for less than one year
288 T H I T R A G I D Y Of G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
during that period. Prussia also did a considerable amount o f buck-passing.
bur that behavior cannot be explained by geography. because Prussia
was located in the heart of Europe, not far away from France. Prussia's
success as a buck-passer was largely due to the fact that neighboring
Austria was an ideal buck-catcher.
In sum, the pattern of balancing and buck-passing displayed by
France's rivals between 1 789 and 1 8 1 5 can be explained in good part by
my theory, which emphasizes the distribution of power and the luck of
geography.
Europe was relatively peaceful for almost fony years after the
Napoleonic Wars ended in 1 8 1 5 . In fact, no war was fought between any
of the great powers until the Crimean War started in 1 8 5 3 . Then the War
of Italian Unification, which had Austria and France on opposing sides,
broke out in 1 8 59. But neither one of these wars altered the European
balance of power in any meaningful way. In contrast, Bismarck initiated a
series of wars in the 1 860s that transformed Prussia into Germany and
fundamentally altered the balance of power in Europe. The next section
looks at how the other great powers reacted to this Prussian expansion.
l l S M A R C K I A N P R U S S I A ( 1 1 6 2 - 7 0 )
Background
Prussia did not become a great power until the mid-eighteenth century,
but even then it was probably the weakest European great power until
the mid-nineteenth century.42 The main reason for its weakness was its
small population compared to the other great powers. Consider that
Prussia's population in 1 800 was about 9 . 5 million, while Austria and
France each had roughly 28 million people, and Russia had about 3 7 million
people (see Table 8 . 1 ) . Prussia's strategic situation changed dramatically
between 1 864 and 1 870, when Bismarck led it to victory i n three
wars. Prussia actually ceased to exist as a sovereign state after 1 87 0 and
instead became the core of a unified Germany that was substantially more
powerful than its Prussian predecessor had been.
Balancing versus Buck，Pauing 289
There was no state called "Germany" when Bismarck was appointed
Prussia's minister-president in September 1 862. Instead, an assortment of
German-speaking political entities were scattered about the center of
Europe, loosely tied together in the German Confederation, an ineffectual
political organization set up after Napoleon's defeat in 1 8 1 5 . There were
two great powers in the confederation: Austria and Prussia. But it also
included medium-sized kingdoms such as Bavaria and Saxony, as well as
numerous small states and free cities-all of which I refer to as the "Third
Germany." It was apparent after the revolutions of 1 848 that German
nationalism was a potent force that was likely to cause some combination
of those German political entities to come together to form a unified
German state. The question of the day was whether Austria or Prussia
would be the core of that new state??ssentially, which great power
would absorb the Third Germany? The wars of 1 864, 1 866, and 1 870-7 1
resolved that issue in Prussia's favor.
Besides Austria and Prussia, there were four other great powers in
Europe in the 1 860s: the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Russia (see
Map 8 . 2 ) . But Italy did not have significant influence on the events surrounding
German unification, although it did fight with Prussia against
Austria in 1 866. Italy was a spanking new state that was especially weak
relative to the other great powers. Therefore, the key issue is how Austria,
the United Kingdom, France, and Russia reacted to Bismarck's efforts to
transform Prussia into Germany. As will become apparent, buck-passing
was their preferred strategy, and although Austria and France balanced
against Prussia at different times, they did so only when they had no alternative.
The Strategic Behavior of the Great Pawers
Prussia's first war under Bismarck ( 1 864) was a straightforward case of
two great powers, Austria and Prussia, ganging up to attack a minor
power. Denmark.41 Their aim was to take the duchies of Schleswig and
Holstein away from Denmark. There was widespread sentiment within
the German Confederation that those areas should be part of some
North Sea
,_BELGIUM/??
\ ' \ .... :. T H E
FRAN C E --:\ GERMANY
Central Europe
in 1 86 6
M A P 8 . 2
._, . .-，-， U S S I A N
E M P I R E
0 M A N
E M I R E
Balancing venua B u c k ， Po u l n g 291
German political entity, not Denmark, because almost all of Holstein's and
about half of Schleswig's population spoke German and thus should be
considered German nationals. Austria and Prussia had little difficulty
defeating Denmark, but they were unable to agree on who should control
Schleswig and Holstein. The United Kingdom, France, and Russia stood
aside while Denmark went down to defeat.
Prussia fought Austria in 1 866, although Italy, which was a bitter rival
of Austria, j oined with Prussia in that fight.44 The war was caused in part
by the lingering dispute between Austria and Prussia over what to do with
Schleswig and Holstein. But the more important issue at stake was which
of these great powers would dominate a united Germany. The Prussian
army easily defeated the Austrian army and Prussia gained control of the
northern portion of the Third Germany. No other great power intervened
to help Austria. Finally, Prussia went to war with France in 1 870 .4??
Bismarck engineered the war on the assumption that a military victory
could be used to complete German unification. France fought mainly for
territorial compensation to offset Prussia's gains in 1 866. The Prussian
army decisively defeated the French army, and Prussia took Alsace and
part of Lorraine from France. More important, Prussia gained control of
the southern half of the Third Germany, which meant that Bismarck had
finally created a united Germany. Europe's other great powers remained
on the sidelines while the French army was routed.
lt is not s u rprising that none of the European great powers balanced
against Austria and Prussia in 1 864, because the stakes were small. Neither
Austria nor Prussia was an especially formidable military power, and it was
not clear which one of them, if either, would ultimately control Schleswig
and Holstein. But the conflicts of 1 866 and 1 870 are a different matter.
Those wars fundamentally altered the European balance of power in
Prussia's favor. At first glance. one would have expected the United
Kingdom, France, and Russia to have balanced with Austria against Prussia
in 1 866, and Austria, the United Kingdom, and Russia to have done the
same with France in 1 870. Instead, they all pursued buck，passing strate，
gies, a n d A u stria was left standing alone against Prussia in 1 866, while
France found itself in the same position in 1 870.
292 T H I T R A G I D Y Of G R I AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
The buck-passing that took place i n Europe between 1 864 and 1 870
was motivated by two different rationales. The United Kingdom and
Russia actually welcomed Prussia's victories, because they believed that a
unified Germany seived their strategic interests.46 Both felt that France
was the most threatening great power in Europe, and that a strong
Germany on France's doorstep would help keep it in check. In essence,
the United Kingdom and Russia were pursuing a buck-passing strategy,
but their aim was not to get another state to balance against Prussia,
which they did not consider a threat. but instead to create a powerful
Germany that could balance against France. which they did fear. The
United Kingdom also thought that a unified Germany would help keep
Russia's attention focused on Europe, and away from central Asia, where
the British and the Russians were fierce rivals. Furthermore. Russia saw a
powerful Germany as a check on Austria, which had recently become
Russia's bitter enemy. Still, fear of France was the main driving force
behind British and Russian thinking.
Austria and France buck-passed for different reasons. Unlike the United
Kingdom and Russia, they feared a unified Germany on their doorstep,
because it would pose a direct threat to their suivival. Nevertheless, they
did not balance together against Prussia; instead they passed the buck to
each other. allowing Bismarck to defeat each of them in tum. In fact,
there is evidence that France welcomed a bloodletting between Austria
and Prussia in 1 866, because France believed it would gain relative power
in the process.47 The main reason for this buck-passing was that each
thought the other could stop the Prussian army and thwan Bismarck's
ambitions without help from another great power. Indeed, it was widely
believed in Europe that Austria and France each had the military wherewithal
to win a war against Prussia.48 France not only had Napoleon's
legacy on its side, but more concretely, had recently scored victories in the
Crimean War ( 1 8 5 3-56) and the War of Italian Unification ( 1 8 5 9 ) .
There are other reasons why Austria a n d France failed to form a balancing
coalition against Prussia. For example, Bismarck was remarkably
skillful at using diplomacy to isolate his targets. Funhermore. Austria and
France had fought against each other in 1 8 59. and residual animosity
?alanclng versus ?uck，PaHlng 29)
from that conflict hindered relation;; in the 1 860s.49 Austria also worried
in 1 870 that if it sided with France. Russia might attack Austria from the
east.so Finally, the Austrian army was still recuperating in 1 870 from the
battering it had sustained in 1 866, and thus it was not in good shape to
take on the Prussian army again. Although these considerations contributed
to Austrian and French buck-passing, they would have mattered
little if French policymakers had believed Austria needed help against
Prussia, and vice versa. In all likelihood, they would have worked togther
to stop Bismarck from creating a unified Germany.
The C a l c u l u s of Power
This prolific buck-passing during the 1 860s can be explained in good part
by Prussia's position in the European balance of power. Prussia was certainly
not a potential hegemon, and although its army grew increasingly
powerful over the course of the decade, it was never so powerful that rival
great powers saw fit to form a balancing coalition against it. A potential
hegemon, as emphasized throughout this book, must be wealthier than
any of its regional rivals and must possess the most powerful army in the
area. But the United Kingdom, not Bismarckian Prussia, controlled the
largest share of potential power in mid-nineteenth-century Europe. The
United Kingdom controlled about 68 percent of European wealth in 1 860,
whereas France controlled 14 percent and Prussia only 10 percent (see
Table 3 . 3 ) . B y 1 870, the United Kingdom still controlled roughly 64 percent
of E u ropean industrial might, while Germany controlled 16 percent
and France 1 3 percent.s 1
Regarding the military balance in the 1 860s, there is not much doubt
that France and Prussia possessed the most powerful armies. France was
surely n umber one between 1 860 and 1 866, which is why B ritain and
Russia looked approvingly on Bismarck's effort to create a unified
Germany. Prussia's army was among the weakest European armies at the
start o f the decade, but it was the most powerful by 1 867, and remained
in the top position through 1 870.52 Austria had a strong army during the
first hall o f the decade, but its power waned alter 1 866." Russia main294
T H I T R A G E D Y O P G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
rained a very large but rather inefficient army that had little powerprojection
capability but was capable of defending Russia against a major
attack by another great power." Finally, although the United Kingdom
had much more latent power than any of its rivals, it maintained a small
and inefficient army that counted for little in the balance of power.ss
Of course, the United Kingdom's and Russia's relative military weakness
hardly mattered for checking Bismarck, because both states wanted
Prussia to transform itself into Germany. What mattered most in 1 866 and
1 870 was how power was distributed among Austria, France, and
Prussia.56 Looking at numbers alone in 1 866, the Austrian army was certainly
a match for the Prussian army (see Table 8 . 3 ) . 57 Austria's standing
army had an advantage of l .2 5 : 1 . After each side's reseives were mobilized,
Austria enjoyed a similar advantage. At the crucial battle of
Koniggratz on July 3, 1 866, an Austrian army of 270,000 faced a Prussian
army of 280,000.58 But the Prussian army was qualitatively better than
the Austrian army.59 Prussian soldiers employed breech -loading rifles,
which gave them an important advantage over their Austrian counterparts,
who were armed with muzzle-loading rifles. The Prussian army also
had a superior staff system, and the Austrian army's multi-ethnic makeup
was beginning to impair its fighting power. although the problem was still
manageable in 1 866. On the other hand, the Austrian army had much
better anillery and cavalry than the Prussian army. Considering both
quantity and quality, the Prussian army held a distinct though not large
power advantage over the Austrian army. This rough balance of power
between Austria and Prussia encouraged France to buck-pass in 1 866.60
France still possessed Europe's most powerful army in 1 866, and it could
have contained Bismarck by making an alliance with Austria. Unlike
Austria and Prussia. France still relied heavily on its standing army, while
showing little interest in mobilizable reserves. Nevenheless, France's standing
army in 1 866 still outnumbered Prussia's fully mobilized army by some
458,000 to 370,000. Funhermore. there was little difference in the quality
of the two armies at that point. The balance of power. however. shifted
against the French army and in the Prussian a rmy's favor between 1 866
and 1 870, although that change was not widely recognized at the time.
Austria
United Kingdom
France
Prussia
Russia
Italy
NOTE: na "' not available
TABLE 8 .3
Manpower in European Armies, 1862-70 (Wars of German Unification)
1862 1864 1866 1870
Standing Standing Standing Army post， Standing Army post，
army army army mobilization army mobilization
255,000 298,000 275,000 460,000 252,000
200,000 200,000 176,731 "' 174, 198
520,000 487,000 458,000 "' 367,850 530,870
213,000 212,000 214,000 370,000 319,000 1,183,000
682,000 727,000 742,000 "' 738,000
185,000 196, 100 200,000 "' 214,354
1870-71
Total Men
Mobilized
1,980,000
1,450,000
SOURCES: Numbers for Austria, Prussia, and Russia in 1862 and 1864 are from Singer and Small, National Material Capabilities Data. The Russian numbers are actually for
1862 and 1865, as Singer and Small unaccountably put the Russian army at over a million men in 1864. Figures for the United Kingdom are from Michael Stephen
Panridge, Military Planning for the Defense of the United Kingdom, 1814-1870 (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1989), p. 72. The 1862 figure for Italy is from Singer and Small, National
Material Capabilities; the 1864 number is from The Statesman's Year-Book (London: Macmillan. 1865), p. 312. Standing army figures for Austria, Prussia, and Russia in I 866 are
from Singer and Small, National Material Capabilities Data; the 1866 figure [or the United Kingdom is from Edward M. Spiers. The Army and Society, 1815-1914 (London:
Longman, 1980). p. 38; the 1866 number for France is from Douglas Porch, Army and Revolution: France, 1815-1848 (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974), p. 67; the
1866 figure for Italy is from Geoffrey Wawro, The Austro-Prussian War (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), pp. 52-53. The 1866 numbers for the Austrian and
Prussian armies aher mobilization are rrom William McElwec. The Art of War: Waterloo to Mons (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, I 974), pp. 53, 62. S1anding army figures
for Austria, Prussia, and Russia in 1870 are from Singer and Small, National Material Capabilities Data; the British number for 1870 is from Spiers, Army and Society, p. 36.
The 1870 figure for France is from Thomas J. Adriance, The Last Gaiter Button: A Study of the Mobilization and Concentration of the French Army in the War of 1870 (Wes1port, CT:
Greenwood, 1987), p. 23; the number for Italy in 1870 is from The Statesman's Year-Book (London: Macmillan, 1871 ), p. 312. The figure for the size of 1he French army after
mobilization (as of July 28, 1870) is from Adriance, Last Gaiter Button. p. 145; this figure is derived by adding lhe number of reserves thal had arrived in depo1s by July 28 lo
the number of men in the standing army. The number for the Prussians (as of August 2, I 870) is from Michael Howard, The Franco-Prussian War: The German In vasion of
Franu. 1870--1871 (London: Methuen, 1961), p. 60. The figures for the total number of Frenchmen and Prussians mobilized during lhe 1870-7 J war are from Theodore
Ropp, War in the Modern World (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1959), p. 156 (n. 13).
296 T H I T R A O I D Y OP O R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
After observing Prussia's success with its mobilized reserves i n the war
of 1 866, France shrunk the size of its standing army and began building a
reserve system of its own. Four years later, the French army had a formidable
reserve structure on paper. It was inefficient in practice, however,
especially compared to the Prussian system, and this difference mattered
greatly when France declared war on July 1 9, 1 870.61 B y that point,
France's standing army was still more powerful than Prussia's, but whereas
Prussia was able to mobilize 1 , 1 8 3,000 soldiers at the start of the war,
France could only muster 5 30,870 soldiers. France eventually managed to
mobilize all of its reservrs, and over the course of the war, it mobilized
more than half a million more men than Prussia. Prussia had a small
advantage in army quality by 1 870. mainly because it had a superior general
staff system and its reserves were better trained than were the French
reserves. 62 However, French infantrymen were better armed than their
Prussian counterpans, although that advantage was offset by Prussia's
breech-loading artillery.
On balance. the Prussian army was markedly more powerful than the
French army in 1 870, mainly because of the sharp asymmetry between
them in short-term mobilization capability. Given this imbalance, Austria
should have allied with France against Prussia. But that did not happen,
because Austrian and French policymakers miscalculated the balance of
power. Both of Prussia's rivals mistakenly believed that the French army
could mobilize reserves as rapidly and effectively as the Prussian army."
Indeed, France's leaders thought that Prussia would have difficulty mobilizing
its reserves, thus providing France with an important military advantage.
However, Prussia correctly recognized that France's mobilization
would be ragged at best, and that the Prussian army would therefore have
a significant advantage on the battlefield.64 Not surprisingly, Bismarck did
not hesitate to go to war against France when the opportunity came i n the
summer of 1 870.
Finally. buck-passing in this case was not heavily influenced by geographical
considerations. The United Kingdom was separated from Prussia
by the English Channel. but that geographical fact appears to have had little
effect on British policy toward Prussia, which was driven mainly by
lalandn9 versu1 luck，Pa11in9 297
B ritish fear of France. Austria, France, and Russia all shared a common
border with Prussia. so geography cannot help account for their different
responses to Bismarck's efforts to create a unified Germany. Prussia's four
potential rivals were cenainly well-positioned to strike into Prussian territory,
had they seen fit to form a balancing coalition. But they did not,
mainly because the distribution of power in Europe between 1 862 and
1 870 encouraged buck-passing.
W I L H E L M I N E G E R M A N Y ( 1 8 9 0- 1 9 1 4 )
B a c k g r o u n d
W h e n Bismarck stepped down as chancellor in March l 890, Germany was
not yet a potential hegemon, although it had a large and growing population,
a dynamic economy. and a formidable army. Those combined assets
caused much anxiety among Europe's other great powers in the last decade
of the nineteenth century. By the early twentieth century, however,
Germany was a full-fledged potential hegemon that was gaining more relative
power every year. Not surprisingly, fear of Germany pervaded European
politics between 1 900 and the outbreak of World War I in August 1 9 1 4 .
B esides Germany, there were five other great powers in Europe during
this period: Austria-Hungary. the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and
Russia (see Map 6 . 2 ) .
Austria- H u ngary, Italy, and Germany were a l l members o f the Triple
Alliance. Austria - Hungary was an especially weak great power with a dim
future .65 In fact, it disintegrated forever at the end of World War I .
Nationalism w a s t h e principal source of Austria-Hungary's weakness. I t
w a s a multinational state, and most of i t s composite ethnic groups wanted
independent states of their own. Austria-Hungary and Germany were
closely allied before World War I. Austria-Hungary had serious territorial
disputes with R ussia in eastern Europe and the Balkans. and needed
Germany to help protect it from the tsar's armies. Germany, on the other
hand, had a vested interest in keeping Austria-Hungary intact so that it
could help block Russian expansion.
298 T H I T R A G E D Y or G R E AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
Italy was also a n especially weak great power. The problem i n Italy was
not nationalism, which had actually helped unify the country in 1 860, but
the fact that Italy had little industrial might and an army that was prone
to catastrophic defeat.66 A key British diplomat was not joking when he
said in 1 909, "We have no desire to seduce Italy from the Triple Alliance,
since she would rather be a thorn in the side than any assistance to France
and ourselves. "67 Italy was not seriously committed to the Triple Alliance
by the early twentieth century, however. because its troubles with France,
which are what originally caused the alliance with Germany and AustriaHungary,
had largely gone away. while its relations with Austria-Hungary
had deteriorated.68 In effect, Italy was a neutral state before World War I.
Not surprisingly, when the war started, Italy remained neutral and then in
May 1 9 1 5 joined with the Allies to fight against its own erstwhile allies,
Austria-Hungary and Germany.
The United Kingdom, France, and Russia were all much more powerful
than Austria-Hungary and Italy, and they were determined to stop
Germany from establishing hegemony in Europe. Therefore, the key issue
is how these three great powers reacted to Wilhelmine Germany's growing
might between 1 890 and 1 9 1 4. As will become apparent, there was
little buck-passing among the Kaiserreich's rivals. Instead, the United
Kingdom, France, and Russia formed a balancing coalition-the Triple
Entente->even years before the stan of World War I.
The Strategic Behavior of the Great Powers
France and Russia, the continental powers sitting across Germany's western
and eastern borders, negotiated an alliance between 1 89 0 and 1 894
that was designed to contain Germany.69 However, neither partner
thought it likely that Germany would attack it at the time o r in the immediate
future. France and Russia were mainly interested in making sure
that Germany did not cause trouble in E u rope. so that they could pursue
imponant goals in other regions of the world. Relations between the
United Kingdom and Germany experienced a marked chill in the early
1 890s, but the United Kingdom showed little inclination to ally with
Balancing versus Buck，PaHin9 299
France and Russia against Germany.70 In fact, the United Kingdom was
frequently at loggerheads with its future allies during the 1 890s. and
almost went to war with France in 1 898 over the Nile fon of Fashoda .11
There was no significant change between 1 894 and 1 904 in how the
future members of the Triple Entente reacted to the German threat. France
and Russia remained allies, committed to containing the Kaiserreich by
threatening it with the specter of a two-front war. Anglo-German relations
were badly strained at the tum of the century by Germany's effons to build
a formidable navy with its own version of the British empire ( Weltpolitik ) .
B u t the United Kingdom did not join forces with France and Russia t o balance
against Germany, although fear of Germany caused a marked
improvement in Anglo-French relations between 1 90 3 and 1 904.72 They
signed the Entente Cordiale on April 8, 1 904, which ellectively put an end
to their bitter rivalry in areas outside of Europe. This agreement was not an
alliance against Germany in disguise, although it certainly made that
alliance easier to consummate after 1 9 0 5 . In effect, the United Kingdom,
ad.ing as a classic offshore balancer, was buck-passing; it was relying on
France and Russia to contain German expansion on the European continent.
Of course, rejecting a continental commitment meant that the United
Kingdom did not have to build a powerful army, which allowed it to concentrate
on maintaining the world's most powerful navy.
There was dramatic change in the constellation of forces in Europe
between 1 90 5 and 1 907, and when the dust had settled. the United
Kingdom was allied with France and Russia in the Triple Entente.7 1 The
United Kingdom was pushed toward accepting a continental commitment
by the simple fact that Germany had the earmarkings al a potential hegemon
b y 1 90 5 .74 But other considerations also affected British calculations.
Japan inflicted a devastating defeat on Russia in 1 90 5 , el!ectively knocking
it out o f the E u ropean balance of power and leaving France without
its main ally.75 To make matters worse, while Russia was going down to
defeat, Germany initiated a major diplomatic crisis with France over
Morocco . The goal was to isolate and humiliate France. which no longer
had a reliable Russian ally and was not allied with the United Kingdom at
the time.
)00 T H I T R A G I D Y Of G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
B ritish policymakers quickly understood that buck，passing was no
longer a viable policy, because France alone could not contain Germany.76
Thus, in late 1 905, the United Kingdom began moving toward a continen，
tal commitment. Specifically, it began organizing a small expeditionary
force to fight alongside the French army on the continent, and it initiated
staff talks between the British and French armies to coordinate plans for
fighting together against Germany.77 At the same time, the United Kingdom
began working to improve relations with Russia, which were badly strained
over their rivalry in Asia. The Anglo，Russian Convention, the third and
final leg of the Triple Entente, was consummated on August 3 1 , 1 907 .78 The
aim was to make sure that the United Kingdom and Russia did not become
involved in a serious dispute outside of Europe (especially in central Asia),
so that they could work together inside of Europe to contain Germany.
Although the United Kingdom, France, and Russia had formed a balancing
coalition against Germany by the summer of 1 907, the British
impulse to buck-pass never completely disappeared. For example, the
United Kingdom never made an explicit commitment to fight with its
allies if Germany attacked them." The Triple Entente was not a tightly
organized and formal alliance like the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) would be during the Cold War. Furthermore, when it became
apparent in 1 9 1 1 that the Russian army had recovered from its defeat in
the Russo-Japanese War. it was once again possible to imagine France and
Russia checking Germany without help from the B ritish army.
Consequently, Anglo-Russian relations became testy again and the Triple
Entente wobbled a bit.80 Finally, when war broke out, the United
Kingdom tried to get France and Russia to pay the awful price of defeating
the mighty German army while it remained on the sidelines, preserving
itself for the postwar period." These hesitations notwithstanding, the
United Kingdom did not abandon its continental commitment after 1 907,
and it went to war alongside France and Russia in the early days of
August 1 9 1 4 . It also committed a mass army to the western fron t and did
its fair share of fighting against the formidable German army.
In sum, we see relatively efficient balancing against Germany i n the
two and a half decades before World War I. France and Russia joined
lalandng veuus luck，Pauing 301
forces to check Germany between 1 890 and 1 905, while the United
Kingdom buck-passed. There was little buck-passing after 1 905, however,
as the United Kingdom joined forces with France and Russia to try to keep
the Kaiserreich at bay. This pattern of behavior by Germany's foes can be
explained in large part by geography and Germany's evolving position in
the European balance of power from 1 890 to l 9 1 4.
The C a l c u l u s of Power
Let us start with the period between 1 890 and 1 90 5 . Germany was not a
potential hegemon until the end of this period, mainly because the United
Kingdom controlled more latent power than Germany did until 1 90 3 . For
example, the United Kingdom controlled 50 percent of European wealth
in 1 890, while Germany controlled 2 5 percent (see Table 3 . 3 ) . France's
share was 1 3 percent, and Russia's was a mere 5 percent. The United
Kingdom still held an advantage over Germany in 1 900, but it was only
3 7 percent to 3 4 percent. Moreover, France's share had shrunk to 1 1 percent,
although Russia's had increased to 10 percent. Germany was rapidly
reaching the point where it would have sufficient industrial might to be a
potential hegemon. Indeed, it reached that point in l 903, when its share
of European wealth reached 3 6 . 5 percent, and the United Kingdom's fell
to 34.5 percent.82 There was never much question that by the early twentieth
century Germany had substantially more latent power than did
either France or Russia.
Regarding actual military power, France and Germany were clearly the
two most powerful armies in Europe between 1 890 and 1 90 5 . As David
Herrmann notes, "'the French and German armies dominated the stage in
the perceptions of military experts, "' in the pre-World War I era.81 But the
German army was the more formidable of the two lighting forces. The
standing armies o f France and Germany, as well as their fully mobilized
armies, were of roughly equal size during this period (see Tables 6 . 1 and
8.4) . The key dil!erence, however, was in how each army used its
reserves. A large portion of Germany's reserves was trained for combat
and organized into fighting units that were expected to participate in the
102 T H I T R A G I D Y OP G R I A T P O W I R P O L I T I C S
opening battles o f a major European war. The French, o n the other hand,
did not believe in training their reserves to fight alongside the standing
army. Thus, although there was not much difference in the size of the
fully mobilized French and German armies, the German army could generate
substantially larger combat forces. If war had broken out in 1 905,
the Germans would have had roughly 1 . 5 million soldiers in their fighting
armies, whereas the French would have had about 840,000, which translates
into a 1 . 8 : 1 advantage for Germany.84 Finally, the German army
enjoyed a moderate qualitative edge over its French rival, mainly because
of its superior general staff and its advantage in heavy artillery.
Russia possessed Europe's largest army between 1 890 and 1 90 5 , but it
was plagued with serious problems, which relegated it to a distant third
place behind the German and French armies.85 Japan's army took advantage
of those deficiencies in the 1 904-5 war and inflicted a punishing defeat
on the Russian army. The British army was small and ill-prepared for continental
watiare before 1 905, and thus hardly mattered in the balance of
power. As Hemnann notes, "Surveys of the European armies with their
strengths and equipment, compiled by general staffs from Paris and Berlin
to Vienna and Rome. very often simply left the British out altogether. "86
Germany was clearly a potential hegemon in the decade before World
War I. Regarding latent power, Germany controlled 40 percent of
European industrial might by 1 9 1 3; the United Kingdom controlled 28
percent (see Table 3 . 3 ) .87 Also, by that point, Germany had more than a
3: 1 advantage in potential power over France and Russia, whose shares of
industrial might were 12 percent and I I percent, respectively.
Funhermore, the German army remained the dominant army in E urope
after 1 90 5 . Indeed, it began a serious expansion program in early 1 9 1 2 .
When war broke out i n 1 9 1 4, Germany was able t o place 1 .7 1 million soldiers
in front-line combat units, while France could muster only 1 .07 million
( see Table 8.4). Of course, Germany's great advantage in potential
power allowed it to mobilize far more men than France over the course of
the war: 1 3 . 2 5 million versus 8 . 6 million. The Russian army was badly
crippled by its defeat in the Russo-Japanese War, and began to show signs
of recovery only in 1 9 1 1 . However, it was still far inferior to the French
TA. I L i 1 . 4
Manpower in European Armies, 1 900-1 9 1 8 (World War I )
1 900 1 905 1 9 1 0 1 9 1 4 1 9 1 4- 1 8
Standing War Standing War Standing War Standing War Tata I
army potential army potential army potential army potential mobilized
Austria-Hungary 3 6 1 , 6 9 3 1 , 872, 1 7 8 386,870 2 , 5 80,000 397, 1 32 2 , 7 50,000 4 1 5, 000 1 , 2 50,000 8,000,000
United Kingdom 2 3 1 , 8 5 1 677, 3 1 4 287,240 742,568 2 5 5, 4 3 8 742, 0 3 6 247,432 1 1 0,000 6, 2 1 1 ,4 2 7
Prance 598,765 2,500,000 580,420 2 , 500,000 6 1 2.424 3 , 1 72,000 7 3 6,000 1 , 0 7 1 ,000 8,660,000
Germany 600, 5 1 6 3,000,000 609, 7 5 8 3,000,000 622,483 3 , 2 60,000 880,000 1 , 7 1 0,000 1 3, 2 50,000
Russia 1 , 1 00,000 4,600,000 I, 1 00,000 4,600,000 1 , 200,000 4,000,000 1 . 320,000 1 , 800,000 1 3, 700,000
Italy 2 6 3 ,684 1 , 0 6 3 , 6 3 5 264, 5 1 6 1 , 064,467 2 3 8, 6 1 7 600,000 2 5 6,000 875,000 5 , 6 1 5,000
NOTE: ，war potential， is as defined in Table 6. 1 . A coumry，s ?fighting army， represents the number of men in the army's fighting units concentrated in the theater of battle
and thus immediately available for combat. The distribution of those fighting annies engaged on more than one from in August 1 9 1 4 , is as follows: Austria-Hungary, J,000,000
in Galicia, 250,000 to invade Serbia; Gennany, 1 . 485,000 to invade France and the Low Countries, 22 5,000 in East Prussia; Russia, 1 . 200,000 in Galicia, 600,000 to invade East
Prussia.
SOURCES: Figures for standing anny and war potential ol all states for 1 900. 1 90 5 , and 1 9 1 O are from The S1atesman's Year， Book (London: Macmillan, various years) except for
Austria ，Hungary's 1 9 1 0 war potemial. which is the author's estimate. Specific years and page numbers are as follows (years refer to editions of The Statesman's Year-Book): AustriaHungary,
1 9 0 1 , p. 386; 1 906, p. 6 5 3 ; 1 9 1 1 . p. 590; United Kingdom, 1 90 1 . pp. 57-58; 1 906, p. 284; 1 9 1 1 , pp. 52-53; France, 1 9 0 1 , p. 5 56; 1 906, pp. 6 1 4- 1 5; 1 9 1 1 , pp. 768--69;
Germany, 1 90 1 . pp. 629-30; 1 906. pp. 936-37; 1 9 1 1 , p. 843; Russia, 1 9 0 1 , p. 9 9 1 ; 1 9 1 1 , p. 1 1 66; Italy, 1 902, p. 806; 1 906, p. 1 088; 1 9 1 1 . p. 963. The figure for the fighting
army of France in 1 90 5 is from David G. Hernnann. The Anning of Europe and rhe Making of the First World War (Princewn, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1 996), p. 4 5 . The same
figure for Germany is the author's estimate based on the discussions in ibid .. pp. 44--45, 1 60, 221 ; and Jack L. Snyder, The Ideology oft he Offensive: Military Decision Making and the
Disas1ers of 1914 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1 984 ) , pp. 4 1 -50, 67, 8 1 . 1 09-1 I, 220. Figures for 1he standing army and mobilized fighting armies of Austria，Hungary in
1 9 1 4 are from Helger H . Herwig, The First World War: Gennanyand Auslria-Hungary. 1 914-1918 (London: Arnold, 1 997), p. 1 2; and Anhur Banks. A Military Atlas of the First World
War (London: Leo Cooper, 1 989), p. 32. For the Uni1ed Kingdom. the numbers are from War Office. Slatisrics of the Military Effort of lhe British Empire During the G??at War (London:
His Majesty's Stationery Office, 1 922). p. 30; an?? Herwig, First World War. p. 98 . Figur??s for the French am:iy are from Les Anntes Francaises Jans La Grande Guerre (Paris: Imprimerie
Nationale, 1 92 3 ) , p. 30; and J. E . Edmonds, Hutoryof the Grea/ War， Military Operations. France and Belgium, 1 914. Vol. I (London: Macmillan, 1 9 3 3 ) , p . 18. For Germany, the
)04 T H E T R A G E D Y OP O R I AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
figures are from Spencer C . Tucker, T??e Great War, 1914-1918 (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1 998), p. 1 7; and Banks, Atlas of the First World War, pp. 30, 32. The figures for the Russian
army are from Alfred Knox, With the Russian Anny, 1914-1 9 1 7 (London: Hutchinson, 1 92 1 ), p.
xviii; and Tucker, The Great War, pp. 40, 44. For Italy, the standing army figure is from
Herrmann, Anning of Europe, p. 234, and the mobilized fighting army figure (which is for May
1 9 1 5, when Italy entered the war) is from Banks, Atlas of the First World War, p. 200. Figures
for total number of men mobilized from 1 9 1 4 to 1 9 1 8 for Aus1ria-Hungary, the United
Kingdom, France, Germany, and Russia are from Roger Chickering, Imperial Germany and the
Great War, 1 914-1918 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1 998) , p. 1 9 5 . The figure for
llaly is from Judith M . Hughes, To the Maginot Line: The Politics of French Military Preparation in
the J920s (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Universily Press, 1 97 1 ), p. 1 2 .
a n d German armies. The post- 1 905 British army was small, b u t it was a
high-quality fighting force, especially when compared to the Russian
army. The British army was probably the third best in Europe during the
decade before World War I, while Russia's was fourth best, a reverse of the
situation before 1 90 5 .
Given that Germany was the most powerful state on t h e continent from
1 890 until 1 905 but was not a potential hegemon until 1 903, it makes sense
that France and Russia balanced together against Germany, while the United
Kingdom stayed offshore and pursued a buck-passing strategy. B y 1 905,
however, the Kaiserreich was clearly a potential hegemon, and thus a much
more serious threat to the balance of power, especially after the Russian
defeat that year. Not surprisingly, the United Kingdom stopped passing the
buck and balanced with France and Russia against Germany, a commitment
it saw through until Germany was finally defeated in November 1 9 1 8.
Finally, geography was no hindrance to balancing against the Kaiserreich.
France and Russia shared a common border with Germany, which made it
easy for them to attack or threaten to attack into German territory. Of course,
that proximity also made it easy for Germany to invade France and Russia,
which cenainly provided them with an incentive to form a balancing coalition
against Germany. The United Kingdom was separated from Germany by
the English Channel, which made buck-passing a more viable option for the
United Kingdom than for either France or Russia. But once the United
Kingdom abandoned buck-passing and accepted a continental commitment,
it could readily bring pressure to bear against Germany by transponing its
army to France, which it did in 1 9 1 4 .
N A Z I G E RMANY ( 1 933-4 1 )
Background
Balancing versus luckaPa11in9 305
France was the most powerful state in Europe between the end of World
War I ( 1 9 1 8 ) and when Hitler became German chancellor on January 30,
1 9 3 3 . It maintained a formidable army and paid serious attention to
defending its eastern border against a German attack (see Table 8 . 5 ) .
Germany presented n o threat t o France during this period, however,
because Weimar Germany was barely capable of defending itself, much
less attacking into France. Germany certainly had the requisite population
and wealth to build the mightiest army in Europe. but it was hamstrung
by the Versailles Treaty ( 1 9 1 9 ) , which took the strategically imponant
Rhineland away from Germany and placed it under international control
and also prohibited Weimar from building a powerful military machine.
T A B L E 8 . 5
Manpower i n European Armies, 1 920-30
1 920 1 925 1 930
United Kingdom 485,000 2 1 6. 1 2 1 208, 5 7 3
France 660,000 684,039 522,643
Germany I00,000 99,086 99, 1 9 1
Italy 250,000 326,000 2 5 1 .470
Soviet Union 3,050,000 260,000 562,000
SOURCES: All figures are from The Statesman's Year-Book (various years), except for the
Soviet Union in 1 920, which is from Singer and Small, National Material Capabilities Data.
Spedlic years and page numbers are as follows (years reler to editions of The Statesman's YearBook):
United Kingdom, 1 920, p. 53; 1 925, p. 44; 1 9 3 1 , p. 4 1 ; France, 1 9 2 1 , p. 8 5 5 ; 1 926, p.
857; 1 9 3 1 , p. 853; Germany. 1 9 2 1 . p. 927; 1 926, p. 927; 1 9 3 1 . p. 927; Italy, 1 9 2 1 . p. 1 0 1 6;
1 926. p. 1 006; 1 9 3 1 . p . 1023; Soviet Union. 1 926. p. 1 2 1 8 ; 1 9 3 1 . p. 1 2 38.
306 T H I T R A O E D T OF O R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
The Soviet Union, too, was a n especially weak great power i n the fif.
teen years after World War I, which explains in good part why Weimar
Germany and the Soviet Union cooperated extensively with each other
before 1 93 3 .88 Soviet leaders faced many problems in the 1 920s as they
tried to rebuild after the destruction wrought by World War I, revolution,
civil war, and a lost war against Poland. But the chief problem they faced
was their backward economy, which could not support a first，class mili，
tary establishment. Josef Stalin initiated a major modernization program
in 1 928 to rectify this problem. It eventually worked, but the fruits of his
ruthless industrialization policy were realized only after the Nazis came to
power. The United Kingdom maintained a small army in the 1 920s that
was probably more concerned with fighting in the British Empire than on
the European continent. Italy, which had been under B enito Mussolini's
rule since 1 922, was the weakest great power in Europe.
European leaders realized soon after Hitler took the reins of power that
Germany would throw off the shackles of Versailles and attempt to alter
the balance of power in its favor. But how quickly Hitler would move, in
what directions he would move, and just how aggressive Nazi Germany
would be were not clear during his first five years in power. Unlike con，
temporary students of international relations, Hitler's counterparts across
Europe did not have the benefit of hindsight. The picture began to come
into focus in 1 9 38, first when he incorporated Austria into the Third
Reich, and then when he forced the United Kingdom and France to let
him take the Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia. It became crystal clear in
1 9 3 9 . In March 1 9 39, the Wehrmacht conquered all of Czechoslovakia,
the first time that Nazi Germany had acquired territory that was not heav，
ily populated with ethnic Germans. Six months later, in September, the
Nazis attacked Poland and started World War II. Less than a year later, in
May 1 940, Hitler invaded France, and a little over a year after that, in
June 1 94 1 , he sent the Wehrmacht into the Soviet Union.
The same three states that worked to contain Wilhelmine Germany
before 1 9 1 4-the United Kingdom, France, and R ussia-were Nazi
Germany's principal rivals between 1 9 3 3 and 1 94 1 . Although the cast of
characters was essentially unchanged, Hitler's opponents mainly buckpassed
among each other in the face of the Third Reich's aggressive behavior,
rather than forming a balancing coalition, as their predecessors had.
The Strategic Behavior of the G reat Powers
Hitler was not in a good position to act aggressively on the foreign policy
front during his early years in omce. He first had to consolidate his political
position at home and revitalize the German economy. Moreover, the
German military he inherited was in no shape to fight a major war anytime
soon. Consider that the mobilized German army that went to war in 1 9 1 4
was composed o f 2 . 1 5 million soldiers and 1 02 divisions.89 The 1 9 3 3 version
of that army had a little over 1 00,000 soldiers and 7 infantry divisions.
Hitler and his generals. however. were determined to rectify that problem
by overthrowing the Versailles Treaty and building a formidable military
instrument. Still, it took about six years to achieve that goal.
Three major building plans underpinned the growth of the German
army.90 In December 1 9 3 3 , Hitler mandated that the peacetime strength of
the army be increased threefold. to 300,000 soldiers and 21 infantry divisions.
New reserve units were also to be created, so that the fully mobilized
field army would have 6 3 divisions. In March 1 9 3 5. a new law stipulated
that the peacetime army would grow to 700,000 with 36 infantry divisions.
Conscription was introduced at the same time, although it did not go into
effect until October I. 1 9 3 5 . the same month that Hitler decided to build 3
panzer divisons in addition to the 36 infantty divisions. The projected size
of the field army, however, remained ?practically unchanged at 63 to 7 3 "
divisions." Finally, t h e August 1 9 3 6 Rearmament Program called for building
a peacetime army of 8 3 0,000 with roughly 44 divisions by October
1 940. The fully mobilized field army was to comprise 4.62 million soldiers
and 1 02 divisions. When World War II started on September I. 1 9 3 9, the
German army contained 3.74 million soldiers and 103 divisions.
Hitler also pushed to create a powerful navy and air force during the
1 9 30s." The development of the German navy was rather haphazard and
unimpressive. but the building of the Luftwaffe was a different story.
Germany had no combat-ready air squadrons when Hitler took office in
J08 T H I T R A G I D Y OP G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
1 93 3 , because the Versailles Treaty outlawed a German air force. B y August
1 9 39, however, the Luftwaffe could claim 302 combat-ready squadrons. As
Wilhelm Deist notes, "'The spectacular development of the Luftwaffe in the
six years from 1 9 3 3 until the outbreak of the war aroused the boundless
admiration as well as dark forebodings of contemporaries. ? 9 3
Until Germany had a powerful army, Hitler was not in a good position
to redraw the map of Europe by the threat or use of force. Thus, Nazi foreign
policy was relatively tame before 1 9 38. Hitler pulled Germany out of
the Geneva Disarmament Conference and the League of Nations in
October 1 9 33, but he also signed a ten-year non-aggression pact with
Poland in January 1 9 34, and a naval treaty with the United Kingdom in
June 1 9 3 5 . The Wehrmachr did occupy and remilirarize the Rhineland in
March 1 9 36. but that was widely recognized to be German territory, even
though the Versailles Treaty mandated that it be permanently demilitarized.
94 There was no oven German aggression in 1 9 38, but Hitler twice
used threats that year to acquire new territory. He compelled Germanspeaking
Austria to join the Third Reich in March 1 9 3 8 (the infamous
Anschluss). and then at Munich in September 1 9 38, he used threats and
bluster to get the United Kingdom and France to detach the Germanspeaking
Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia and give it to Nazi Germany.
By 1 9 39, Hitler finally possessed a potent military instrument, and he
turned to oven aggression that same year.
The United Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Union all feared Nazi
Germany, and they each paid serious attention to devising a viable containment
strategy. However. with the possible exception of the Soviet
Union. there was little interest among them in putting together a balancing
coalition like the Triple Entente that might deter Hitler b y threatening
Germany with a two-front war. Instead, each preferred buck-passing.
Between 1 9 3 3 and March 1 9 39, there was no alliance between any of
Hitler's great-power rivals. The United Kingdom buck-passed to France,
which tried to push Hitler eastward against the smaller states of eastern
Europe and possibly the Soviet Union, which i n tum tried to pass the
buck to the United Kingdom and France. In March 1 9 39, the United
Kingdom finally joined forces with France against the Third Reich, but the
Balancing versu? Buck，PaHlng 309
Soviet Union did not join with its former allies. After Germany knocked
France out of the war in June 1 940, the United Kingdom tried to ally with
the Soviet Union but failed because the Soviets preferred to continue
buck-passing.
Although Hitler's rivals showed little interest in creating an antiGerman
balancing coalition, both France and the Soviet Union went to
considerable lengths in the 1 9 30s to maintain armies that could stand up
to the Wehrmacht. They did so to increase the likelihood that buck-passing
would work, because the more powerful each was, the less likely that
Hitler would attack it. Strong armies were also an insurance policy to protect
them in the event that 1) they ended up catching the buck and facing
the Nazi war machine alone, or 2) buck-passing worked, but the buckcatcher
failed to contain the Wehrmacht.
The United Kingdom's initial strategy for dealing with Hitler was to pass
the buck to France, which probably had the most powerful military in
Europe during the mid- l 9 30s.95 British leaders recognized that France
would get little assistance from the Soviet Union, which was fine by them,
but they hoped that France's alliances with eastern Europe's minor powers
( C zechoslovakia, Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia) would help France
contain Hitler. The United Kingdom had powerful incentives to buck-pass
in E urope, because it also faced threats from Japan in Asia and Italy in the
Mediterranean, and its anemic economy could not provide for a substantial
military presence in all three of those regions.
Given this dangerous threat environment, the United Kingdom sharply
increased defense spending in 1 9 34, more than tripling its defense budget
by 1 9 3 8 . " But on December 1 2. 1 937. the United Kingdom decided not to
build a n army to fight alongside France on the continent. Indeed, the
B ritish cabinet decided to starve the army of funds, a move that was certainly
consistent with a buck-passing strategy. Spending on the air force
was emphasized instead, to deter Hitler from launching the Luftwaffe
against the British homeland.
Nevertheless, it became apparent by late 1 93 8 that France needed the
United Kingdom's help to contain Nazi Germany. Not ortly was the
Wehrmacht o n the verge of becoming a formidable military instrument,
310 T H I T R A G E D Y O f G R I AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
but the Anschluss and Munich had delivered the death blow t o France's
already weak alliance system in eastern Europe. The United Kingdom
finally abandoned buck-passing and formed a balancing coalition with
France in March 1 9 39, shortly after Hitler conquered Czechoslovakia.97 At
the same time, the United Kingdom began racing to build an army to fight
in France in the event of war. The United Kingdom showed a modicum of
interest in forging an alliance with the Soviet Union but ultimately found
no basis for resurrecting the liiple Entente.9'
The United Kingdom and France declared war against Germany on
September 3, 1 9 39, two days after the Wehrmacht invaded Poland. But
they did not fight against the German army until the spring of 1 940, when
Hitler struck in the west and knocked France out of the war. By the summer
of 1 940, a badly weakened United Kingdom stood alone against Nazi
Germany. British leaders tried to form a balancing coalition with the Soviet
Union against Hitler, but they failed, mainly because Stalin continued to
pursue a buck-passing strategy. He hoped to see the United Kingdom and
Germany engage in a long war, while the Soviet Union stayed out of the
fighting." The United Kingdom and the Soviet Union finally came together
in an alliance after the Wehrmacht attacked the Soviet Union in June
1 94 1 .
France, too, was committed t o buck-passing. 1 00 D u ring the 1 920s, well
before Hitler came to power, France formed alliances with some of the
small states in eastern Europe for the purpose of containing a future
German threat. Those alliances remained in place after 1 9 3 3 , which might
seem to indicate that France was not buck-passing but was committed to
building a balancing coalition against Nazi Germany. In reality, however,
those alliances were largely moribund by the mid- 1 9 3 0s, in good pan
because France had no intention of coming to the aid of its allies, as it
demonstrated when it abandoned Czechoslovakia at M unich in 1 9 3 8 . ' "
Indeed, France hoped to p u s h Hitler eastward, where it h o p e d the
Wehrmacht would get bogged down in a war in eastern Europe or maybe
even the Soviet Union. "France's military policy, ， as Arnold Wolfers notes,
"tends to prove that, notwithstanding her far-flung commitments on the
Vistula and the Danube, she was more concerned about receiving than
Balancing v?nu? Buck，PaHing 3 1 1
about giving support, more preoccupied with the defense o f her own soil
than with the protection of small countries. " 102
To encourage Hitler to strike first in the East, French leaders went to
some lengths during the 1 9 30s to foster good relations with the Third
Reich. That policy remained in place even after Munich.101 On the other
hand, France made no serious effon to form a balancing coalition with the
Soviet Union. Geography certainly worked against that alliance (see Map
8 . 3 ) . The Soviet Union did not share a common border with Germany,
which meant that in the event of a Wehrmacht attack against France, the
Red Army would have to move through Poland to strike at Germany. Not
surprisingly, Poland was categorically opposed to that idea.104 More generally,
a Franco-Soviet alliance would have alienated the minor powers in
eastern Europe, since they tended to fear the Soviet Union more than
Germany, and it probably would have caused them to ally with Hitler,
which would have undermined France's buck-passing strategy.
France was also discouraged from approaching the Soviet Union by
concern that a Franco-Soviet alliance would ruin any chance that the
United Kingdom might join forces with France against Nazi Germany. Not
only were most British leaders hostile to the Soviet Union because they
despised and feared communism, but if France had a reliable Soviet ally, it
would not need the United Kingdom, which would then be free to continue
buck-passing to France. 1os Finally, France did not form an alliance with
Stalin because French leaders sought to encourage Hitler to strike first
against the Soviet Union rather than France, and in the event that that
happened, they had no intention of coming to the aid of Moscow. In
short, France was buck-passing to the Soviet Union as well as to the
smaller states of eastern Europe.
France's interest in passing the buck to the Soviet Union was reinforced
by the widespread belief that Stalin was trying to buck-pass to France.
which many French policymakers took as evidence that the Soviets were
u n reliable alliance partners. 106 Of course, many Soviet policymakers recognized
what the French were up to, which j ust reinforced Stalin's interest
in buck-passing, which, in tum, confirmed French suspicions that the
Soviets were buck-passing to them. 107 As a consequence of all these fac??
??
，'
..
Europe in 1935
MAP 8.3
ff'
POLAND
，: ??'?":'??J,;?;;; : / ;
.
.
/s wrrz-.:??:??. :，??u?nlA '，"\ .. : ，- .
?? c:::;::;:i Mediterranean Seo
Balancing versus Buck， Pauin9 l l l
tors. France showed little interest in allying with t h e Soviet Union against
Hitler during the 1 930s.
The United Kingdom's buck，passing notwithstanding, French leaders
worked hard throughout the 1 9 30s to get the United Kingdom to commit
itself to the defense of France . 1 08 They prized an Anglo-French alliance
because it would increase the likelihood that their buck-passing strategy
would work. The combination of British and French military might make
a German offensive in the west less likely, and thus increased the probability
that the Wehrmacht would strike first in the east. Moreover, if buckpassing
failed. fighting with the United Kingdom against the Wehrmacht
was clearly preferable to fighting it alone. France also mobilized its own
resources to facilitate buck-passing and to protect itself in the event of a
buck-passing failure. Little was done to increase French defense spending
during Hitler's first two years in office, probably because France had a relatively
powerful military when Hitler came to power in 1 9 3 3 . But starting
in 1 9 3 5 , the size of the annual defense budget grew constantly and
sharply as different French governments sought to maintain a military
that could stymie a Wehrmacht offensive. For example, France spent 7 . 5
billion francs on defense in 1 9 3 5 , 1 1 .2 billion francs i n 1 9 37. and 4 4 . l billion
francs in 1 9 3 9 . 109
Scholars disagree substantially about Soviet policy for dealing with Nazi
Germany between 1 9 34 and 1 9 3 8 . Stalin's strategy for the period from
1 9 3 9 to 1 94 1 is more straightforward and less controversial.
There are three main schools of thought on Soviet policy in the midl
9 3 0 s . Some claim that Stalin, not Hitler, was driving events in Europe,
and that the Soviet leader pursued a bait-and-bleed strategy. Specifically,
it is argued, Stalin intervened in German politics to help Hitler become
chancellor because he believed that the Nazis would start a war against
the United Kingdom and France, which would work to the Soviets'
advantage. 1 10 Others contend that Stalin was determined to build a balancing
coalition with the United Kingdom and France to confront Nazi
G ermany, but this effort at .. colledive security" failed because the Western
powers refused to cooperate with him. 1 1 1 Finally, some argue that Stalin
was p u rsuing a buck-passing strategy, 1 1 2 the aim of which was to foster
cooperation with Hitler while working to undermine Germany's relations
3 14 T H E T R A G E D Y Of G R E AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
with the United Kingdom and France, s o that Hitler would b e inclined to
attack them first. That approach would not only facilitate passing the buck
to the Western great powers but would also create opportunities for Hitler
and Stalin to gang up on small states in eastern Europe, such as Poland.
Although Stalin was certainly a clever strategist at times, there is insuf.
ficient evidence to support the bait，and，bleed thesis. There is, however,
considerable evidence that he pushed both the collective security and
buck，passing strategies between 1 9 34 and 1 9 3 8 . m This is not surprising,
since the political landscape in Europe was undergoing rapid and funda，
mental change in the wake of Hitler's rise to power, and it was not clear
where events were leading. Historian Adam Ulam puts the point well:
"'Confronted with a terrible danger, the Soviets felt a desperate need to
keep all the options open, hoping that one of them would enable the
[Soviet Union] to postpone or avoid an actual entanglement in war." 1 1 4
Nevertheless, o n balance, t h e available evidence from t h e m i d ， l 930s
suggests that buck，passing was Stalin's preferred strategy for dealing with
Nazi Germany. Buck，passing, of course, is an attractive strategy, which is
why the United Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Union were all pursuing
it. 1 1 5 If it works as designed, the buck，passer avoids the heavy costs of
fighting the aggressor and might even gain relative power. Granted,
Stalin's buck，passing strategy ultimately failed when France fell in June
1 940. But Stalin had no way of knowing that would happen. Indeed,
there was good reason at the time to think that the United Kingdom and
France would hold their own against the Wehrmacht. Buck，passing in
Europe was also attractive because the Soviets faced a serious threat from
Japan in the Far East throughout the l 930s. 1 1 6
Furthermore, Stalin surely recognized that there were a h o s t of factors
at play in the rnid， 1 9 30s that made it unlikely that he could resurrect the
Triple Entente. For example, the French army was not well，suited for
offensive operations against Germany, especially after Hitler took back the
Rhineland in March 1 9 36. Therefore, Stalin could not depend on France
to attack Germany if Hitler struck first against the Soviet Union. Stalin
also had abundant evidence that both the United Kingdom and France
were committed to buck，passing, which did not bode well for their relia，
Balancing versus luck，Pa11in9 1 1 5
bility as allies. This problem was compounded b y the deep-seated ideological
hostility between Moscow and the Western powers . 1 1 7 Finally, as
noted, the geography of eastern Europe was a major impediment to the
so-called colleaive security option.
The Soviet Union also mobilized its own resources to protect itself from
a German attack and to increase the likelihood that its buck-passing strategy
would work. Recall from Chapter 6 that one of the main reasons
Stalin began ruthlessly modernizing the Soviet economy in 1 928 was to
prepare it for a future European war. The Red Army grew substantially in
size during the 1 9 30s, almost tripling in size between 1 9 3 3 and 1 9 3 8 (see
Table 8 . 6 ) . The quantity and quality of the army's weaponry also
improved markedly. For example, Soviet industry produced 952 artillery
pieces in 1 9 30, 4,368 in 1 9 3 3, 4,324 in 1 9 36, and 1 5,300 in 1 940. " 8 ln
1 9 30, l 70 tanks were built; in l 9 3 3, 3, 509, and in l 936, 4,800. The number
dropped to 2, 794 tanks in 1 940. but that was because the Soviets
started producing medium and heavy tanks in 1 9 37, rather than light
tanks, which were easier to crank off the assembly line in large numbers.
The quality of the fighting forces was good and steadily improving in the
mid - l 930s. In fact, by l 9 36, "the Red Army had the most advanced doctrine
and the greatest capability for armoured warfare in the world. " 1 19
But Stalin's purges struck the military in the summer of 1 93 7 and seriously
damaged its fighting capacity through the early years of World War II. 1 20
There is not much debate about Stalin's policy between 1 9 3 9 and
1 9 4 1 : buck-passing coupled with the search for opportunities to gang up
with Hitler on the smaller states of eastern Europe. That policy was formalized
in the infamous Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact of August 23, 1 9 3 9 ,
w h i c h not o n l y divided up most of eastern Europe between Germany
and the S oviet Union, but also virtually guaranteed that Hitler would go
to war with the United Kingdom and France while the Soviet Union sat
out the figh t . One might have expected Stalin to abandon buck-passing
after the collapse of France in the summer of 1 940 and instead join forces
with the United Kingdom against Hitler. As noted, Stalin continued to
pursue a b u ck - passing strategy, hoping that the United Kingdom and
Nazi Germany would become involved in a long and costly war. That
3 16 T H E T R A G E D Y OF G R I AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
approach failed, however, when the Wehrmacht invaded the Soviet
Union on June 22, 1 94 1 . Only then did the British and the Soviets
become allies against the Third Reich.
The Calculus of Power
The distribution of power among the European great powers and geography
can account in large part for the buck-passing behavior of Hitler's
adversaries during the 1 9 30s. Germany controlled more latent power
than did any other European state from 1 9 30 until 1 944 ( see Tables 3 . 3
and 3 . 4 ) . I n 1 9 30, Weimar Germany accounted for 3 3 percent of
European wealth, while the United Kingdom, its nearest competitor, controlled
27 percent. France and the Soviet Union possessed 22 and 14 percent.
respectively. By 1 940, Germany's share of industrial might had
grown to 36 percent, but its nearest competitor was now the Soviet
Union with 28 percent; the United Kingdom, with 24 percent, had fallen
to third place.
For purposes of comparison, Germany had controlled 40 percent of
European wealth in 1 9 1 3, prior to World War I, while the United Kingdom
was in second place, with 28 percent. France and Russia accounted for 1 2
and 1 1 percent, respectively. Based o n latent power alone, i t i s apparent
that Germany was almost as well-positioned to be a potential hegemon in
the 1 9 30s as it was earlier in the century. It is also clear that the Soviet
Union markedly increased its share of European industrial might during
the 1 9 30s, which meant that it had the wherewithal to build a much more
formidable army by the end of that decade than it had in either 1 9 1 4 or
1 930. 12 1
Despite a l l of its latent power, Germany was n o t a potential hegemon
until 1 9 39, because it did not have the most powerful army in Europe
before then. Hitler inherited a puny army. and it took time to transform
it into a well-organized and well-equipped fighting force with the capability
to take the offensive against another great power. The critically
important August 1 9 3 6 Rearmament Program, after all, was not expected
to be completed until October 1 940. Its goals were realized for the most
lalancing veuus Buck?Pa11ln1 Jl7
part a year earlier (in the summer of 1939) b
pushed at a dizz
.
, ecause rearmament was
ymg pace and because of the resources Germany gar-
??ered from the acquisition of Austria and Czechoslovakia. 122 But reannmg
.
at such a rapid pace caused numerous organizational problems,
which left the Wehrmacht in no shape to fight a great-power war before
1939.m This general state of unreadiness was the main reason that army
leaders were at odds with Hitler during the Munich crisis in 1938. They
feared that he would drag Germany into a great-power war that it was
ill-prepared to fight.'"
TA.ILi 1.6
Manpower in European Armies, 1933-38
1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938
United Kingdom 195,256 195,845 196, 137 192,325 190,830 212,300
France 558,067 550,678 642,875 642,785 692,860 698,IOI
Germany 102,500 240,000 480,000 520,000 550,000 720,000
Italy 285,088 281,855 1,300,000 343,000 370,000 373,000
Soviet Union 534,657 940,000 1, 300,000 1,300,000 1,433,000 l,513,000
SOURCES: The numbers for the United Kingdom are from the Ua9ue of Natiom Armaments
Year-Book (Geneva : League of Nations, June 1940), pp. 58-59. On France, see the annual
volu mes of the League of Natiom Armaments Year-Book (dates correspond to volume publica，
tion dates): July 1 934, p. 259; June 1935, p. 366; August 1936, p. 368; and Tht Statesman's
Year-Book (London: Macmillan, various years): 1937, p. 898; 1938, p. 908; 1939, p. 904. The
German numbers are from Banon Whaley. Covert German Rearmament, 1919-1939: De′ption
and Misperception (Frederick, MD: University Press of America, 1984), p. 69; Herben
Rosinski, The German Army (London: Hoganh, 1939), p. 244; Wilhelm Deist, Tht Wehnnacht
and German Rearmament (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1981 ), p. 44; and The
Statesman 's Ye ar-Book, 1938, p. 968. For Italy, see The Statesman's Ytar，Book, 1934, p. 1043;
1935, pp. 1051-52; 1936, p. 1062; 1938, pp. 1066-67; 1939, p. 1066; and Singer and Small,
Na tional Material Capabi/itits Data. The Soviet numbers are from the League of Nations
Armaments Year-Book, 1934, p. 720; June 1940, p. 348; Singer and Small, National Material
Capabilities Data; and David M. Glantz, Tht Military Strategy of the Soviet Union: A History
(London: Frank Cass, 1992), p. 92.
118 T H I T R A O I D Y O P O R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
While the Wehnnacht was experiencing growing pains between 1 9 3 3
and 1 939, France and the Soviet Union were expanding their militaries to
counter the German buildup. Both the Red Anny and the French army
were more powerful than the German army through 1 937, but their
advantage eroded over the next two years, and Germany became the
dominant military power in Europe by mid- 1 939. For this reason, many
scholars now believe that Hitler's rivals should have fought the
Wehnnacht in 1 9 38 rather than 1 9 3 9 . m
T h e French army, as Table 8 . 6 makes clear, w a s substantially larger
than its German counterpart as late as 1 9 37. Ir also enjoyed a qualitative
edge, not because the French army was an efficient fighting force (it was
not), but because the Wehrmacht's ongoing expansion severely limited
its fighting capacity. B y 1 9 38. Germany finally had a peacetime army that
was larger than France's, but as Table 8 . 7 makes clear, France could still
mobilize a larger wartime army: 1 00 French versus 71 German divisions.
By 1 9 39, Germany had erased that French advantage; they now could
mobilize about the same number of divisons for war. Moreover, the
German army was qualitatively better than the French army, and it had a
superior air force supporting it. 1 26 Given that Germany possessed significantly
more wealth and a much larger population than France, it is hardly
surprising that the military power gap between them widened even
lunher by 1 940.
The Red Anny was also qualitatively and quantitatively superior to the
German army between 1 9 3 3 and 1 9 3 7 . David Glantz is surely correct
when he says, "Had the Germans and Soviets fought in the mid- l 9 30s,
the Red Army would have had a considerable advantage over its opponent
. " "' That advantage slipped away in the late 1 9 30s, however, not just
because of the German army's growing strength, but also because of
Stalin's purges (see Table 8 . 8 ) .
Given that Germany was no potential hegemon before 1 93 9, a n d given
that the French army and the Red Anny could each have matched the
German army through 1 9 38, it makes sense that a balancing coalition like
the Tuple Entente did not form against Germany before 1 9 39, and that
Hitler's rivals instead passed the buck to each other. It also makes sense
Balancing venus Buck，Pauing 3 1 9
that the United Kingdom and France formed an alliance against Hitler in
March 1 9 39, because the day was fast approaching when the German
army would be clearly superior to the French army, which would then
need help fending off the Wehrrnacht.
T A I L E 1 . 7
Size o f French and German Armies after
Mobilization, 1 938-40 (number of divisions)
1 938
France 1 0 0
Germany 7 1
1 939
1 02
1 0 3
1 940
1 04
1 4 1
SOURCES: Figures a r e from Williamson Murray, The Change i n the European Balance of Powu,
1938-1939: The Path w Ruin (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1 984), p. 242; Richard
Overy, The Penguin Historic.al AtltIS of the Third Reich (London: Penguin, 1 996), p. 67; and Albert
Seaton. The German Army, 1933-1945 (New York: New American Library, 1 982), pp. 92-93, 95.
That the Western powers did not join forces with the Soviet Union to
recreate the Triple Entente can be explained by the fact that the United
Kingdom and France did not have to fear for the Soviet Union's survival
in 1 9 3 9 the way they had feared for Russia's survival before World War I.
The Western powers had little choice but to ally with Russia before 1 9 1 4,
because it was barely capable of standing up to a German offensive. The
Soviet Union. on the other hand, had much more industrial and military
might than its Russian predecessor had. and thus the United Kingdom and
France were not compelled to defend it. Stalin, for his part, recognized
that the United Kingdom and France together were at least as powerful as
Germany, and thus he could buck-pass to them. 1 28 Finally, the absence of
a common border between Germany and the Soviet Union from 1 9 3 3
until September 1 9 3 9 greatly hindered efforts t o create a united front
Standing
army
United Kingdom 2 3 7 , 7 3 6
Prance 900,000
Germany 7 3 0,000
Italy 5 8 1 ,000
Soviet Unfon l , 520,000
T A I L E I . I
Manpower in European Armies, 1 939-4 1
1 939 1 940
Mobilized Fighting Total Fighting
army army army army
897,000 402,000 l , 888,000 na
4,895,00 2 , 2 24,000 5,000,000
3,740,000 2 , 7 60,000 4 , 370,000 3,050,000
na na l , 6 00,000
na na 3 , 602,000 2, 900.000
1 94 1
Toto I
army
2 , 292,000
5 .200,000
5,000,000
1 939-45
Total men
mobilized
5 , 8 96,000
1 7 ,900,000
9, 1 00,000
2 2,400,000
NOTE: na = not available . ..F ighting army .. is as defined in Table 8.4; .. mobilized armyw represents the total number of men serving in the army aher mobilization was
completed in 1 9 39. It is thus not restricted to fighting men. This number is then called .. total armyw for 1 940 and 1 94 1 . Comparing the figures given in Table 8.7 with
those here, ii is apparent that a larger percentage of German soldiers were put in combat divisions rather than support positions; this gave Germany an advantage in
fighting power.
SOURCES: The numbers for the United Kingdom are from the League of Nations Armaments Year-Book (Geneva: League of Nations. June 1 940), p. 59; l.C.B. Dear, ed .. The
Oxford Companion to World War II (Oxford: Oxford University Press, I 9 9 5 ) , p. 1 1 48; and John Ellis, World War II: A Statisti01.l Survey (New York: Facts on File, 1 99 3 ) , p. 228.
The French numbers are from Ellis, World War II, p. 227; Pierre Montagnon, Histoire de l'Armie Fran01.ise: Des Mi/ices Roya/es a /'Annie de Mirier (Paris: Editions Pygmalion.
1 997), p. 250; Phillip A. Karber et al., Assessing the Correlation of Pore.es: Frana 1940, Report No. BDM/W-79-560-TR (McLean, VA: BDM Corporation, 1 979), table l; and
Dear. ed., Oxford Companion to World War II, p. 40 1 . For Germany, see Whaley, Covert German Rearmament, p. 69; Dear. ed .. Oxford Companion to World War II, p. 468; Matthew
Cooper, The German Army, 1933-1945: Its Political and Military Failure (New York: Stein and Day, 1 97 8 ) , pp. 2 1 4. 270; and Ellis, World War II, p. 2 2 7 . The numbers for the
Soviet Union are from Glantz, Military Strategy. p . 92; Louis Rotundo, .. The Creation of Soviet Reserves and the 1 94 1 Campaign, .. Military Affairs 50, No. l (January 1 98 5 ) ,
p. 23; Ellis, World War Il, p. 2 2 8 ; a n d Jonathon R . Adelman, Revolution, Annies, and War: A Politi01.l History (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1 98 5 ) , p. 1 74. F o r Ilaly, s e e Singer
and Smal\. National Material Capabilities Data; Dear, ed., Oxford Companion fO World War Tl. p. 228; and Ellis, World War II, p. 228.
lalanclng venu? lu1:k，Pauln9 321
against the Third Reich. Moreover, it made it likely that France (which
bordered Nazi Germany ) , not the Soviet Union, would end up catching
the buck.
The B ritish desire to form an alliance with the Soviet Union after June
1 940 needs no explanation, as the United Kingdom was already at war
with Nazi Germany and naturally wanted all the help it could get. The
more interesting question is why the Soviet Union rejected the United
Kingdom's ovenures and continued buck-passing to it. After all, the
German army was far superior to what was left of the British army after
Dunkirk, which should have allowed Germany to easily defeat the
United Kingdom and then turn its guns against the Soviet Union. The
stopping power of water, however, saved the United Kingdom and made
buck-passing look like a winning strategy for Stalin. The English Channel
made it a lmost impossible for the Wehrmacht to invade and conquer the
United Kingdom, which meant that the British were likely to fight a long
war with the Germans in the air, on the seas, and in peripheral areas
such as North Africa and the Balkans. Indeed, that is mainly what happened
between 1 940 and 1 94 5 . Allying with the United Kingdom was
also unattractive for Stalin because not only would the Soviet Union get
dragged into war with the Third Reich. but the Red Army would end up
doing most of the fighting against the Wehrmacht, since the United
Kingdom was in no position to send a large army to the continent. These
considerations notwithstanding, there was an important flaw in Stalin's
thinking: he mistakenly assumed that Hitler would not invade the Soviet
Union until he decisively defeated the British and solidified his western
flan k . 1 29
Let me conclude with a final word about the contrasting behavior of
Germany's rivals in the years before the two world wars. Three key differences
account for why the United Kingdom, France. and the Soviet
Union tended to buck-pass against the Third Reich but formed a balancing
coalition against the Kaiserreich seven years before World War I.
First, Nazi Germany was not a formidable military threat until 1 9 3 9 ,
whereas the kaiser's a r m y w a s t h e most powerful fighting force in
E u rope from a t least 1 87 0 until the end of World War I. Indeed, Hitler's
322 T H E T R A G E D Y OF G R E AT P O W E R P O L I T I C S
Germany was not a potential hegemon until 1 9 39; Wilhelmine Germany
achieved that status in 1 90 3 . Second, the Soviet Union controlled considerably
more potential as well as actual military power during the 1 9 30s
than did pre-World War I Russia. Thus, the United Kingdom and France
had less cause to worry about the survival of the Soviet Union than
about tsarist Russia. Third, Germany and Russia shared a common border
before 1 9 1 4, but did not before 1 9 39, and separation encouraged buckpassing.
T H E C O L D WA R ( 1 9 4 5 - 9 0 )
Background
When the Third Reich finally collapsed in April 1 94 5 , the Soviet Union
was left standing as the most powerful state in Europe. Imperial Japan
collapsed four months later (August 1 94 5 ) , leaving the Soviet Union also
as the most powerful state in Northeast Asia. No other great power existed
in either Europe or Northeast Asia that could stop the mighty Red
Army from overrunning those regions and establishing Soviet hegemony.
The United States was the only state powerful enough to contain Soviet
expansion.
There were reasons, however, to think that the United States might not
balance against the Soviet Union. The United States was neither a
European nor an Asian power, and it had a long history of avoiding
entangling alliances in those areas. In fact, Franklin Roosevelt had told
Stalin at Yalta in February 1 945 that he expected all American troops to
be out of Europe within two years after World War II ended. 1 30
Furthermore, given that the United States and the S oviet Union were
allies in the fight against Nazi Germany from 1 94 1 until 1 94 5 . it was difficult
for American policymakers to do a sudden 1 80 - degree turn and tell
the public that the Soviet Union was now a deadly foe, not a friendly
state. There was also a powerful imperative after the war for Stalin and
Harry lfuman to work together to deal with the defeated Axis powers.
especially Germany.
Balancing versus Buck，Pauing 123
These considerations notwithstanding, the United States acted to check
Soviet expansion almost immediately after World War II ended, and it
maintained a formidable containment policy until the Soviet threat disappeared
some forty-five years later. Marc Trachtenberg puts the point well:
"The policy of containment, as it came to be called, was adopted at the
beginning of 1 946. It was adopted even before the term was coined, certainly
well before the rationale for the policy was developed by its chief
theoretician, George Kennan. " l l l The United States balanced with such
alacrity and effectiveness because it was in America's national interest to
prevent the Soviet Union from dominating Europe and Northeast Asia,
and because there was no other great power that could contain the Soviet
army in the bipolar world of the mid- l 940s. Simply put, the United States
had no buck-passing option, and thus it had to do the heavy lifting
itself. 1 12
T h e Strateg i c Behavior of the Great Powers
Iran and Turkey were important targets of Soviet expansion in the early
days of the Cold War. 1 33 The Soviet Union had occupied northern Iran
during World War II but had promised to pull its troops out no later than
six months after the war in the Pacific ended. When there was no evidence
in early 1 946 that the Soviet army was leaving, the United States
put pressure on the Soviets to live up to their promise. It worked: Soviet
troops were gone from Iran by early May 1 946.
Stalin was also interested in expanding into the eastern Mediterranean
area. His main target was Turkey. In the summer of 1 945, he demanded
territory in the eastern part of Turkey and the right to build bases in the
Dardanelles, in order to have naval access to the Mediterranean Sea.
Furthermore, a powerful communist insurgency raged in Greece between
1 944 and 1 949, when that country was consumed by civil war. Stalin did
not directly support the Greek Communists, but he surely would have
benefited if they had won the civil war and ruled Greece. 1 34 The United
States initially relied on the United Kingdom to protect Greece and Turkey
from the Soviet Union. but worried throughout 1 946 that the B ritish
324 T H I T R A G I D Y or G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
could not d o the job. When i t became apparent i n late February 1 947 that
the United Kingdom's economy was too weak to provide the necessary
economic and military aid to Greece and Turkey, the United States rapidly
filled the void.
President Truman went before a joint session of Congress on March
12, 1 947, and laid out the famous doctrine that bears his name. He
argued in no uncertain terms that it was time for the United States to
stand up to the threat of communism, not just in the Mediterranean, but
all around the globe. He also requested $400 million in aid for Greece
and Turkey. Senator Arthur Vandenberg ( R - Mich . ) told Truman beforehand
that if he wanted that money he would have to "scare hell out of
the country. " m He did, and Congress approved his request. The Greek
communists were subsequently defeated and the Soviets got no Turkish
territory or bases in the Dardanelles. Greece and Turkey eventually
joined NATO in February 1 9 5 2 .
American policymakers also worried throughout 1 946 and early 1 947
that the Soviet Union wou ld soon dominate Western Europe. Their fear
was not that the Soviet army would drive its way to the Atlantic Ocean.
Instead, U . S . leaders feared that powerful communist parties with close
ties to Moscow might come to power in France and Italy, because their
economies were in terrible shape and their populations were deeply dis，
satisfied with their destitute status. The United States responded to this
problem in early June 1 947 with the famous Marshall Plan, which was
explicitly designed to fight "hunger, poverty, desperation and chaos" in
Western Europe. 1 16
At the same time, the United States was also deeply concerned about
the future of Germany. Neither the Americans nor. it appears, the Soviets
had clear-cut views on the subject when World War II ended. m During
the early Cold War years the West showed little fear that the Soviets
would try to conquer Germany by force. Indeed, there is evidence that
Stalin was content to live with a permanently partitioned Germany, provided
that the United Kingdom, France, and the United States did not
merge their occupation zones and create an independent West German
state. But American policymakers came to believe over the course of 1 947
Balancin9 veuua Buck-Pauin9 325
that if communism was to be kept out of Western Europe (including the
Allied occupation zones in Germany), it was essential to build a prosperous
and powerful West Germany that would have close ties with the other
states of Western Europe. That outcome was effectively sealed at the
London Conference in December 1 94 7; the plan was put into effect over
the next two years. The Federal Republic of Germany came into being on
September 2 1 , 1 949. ln shon, the United States sought to contain Soviet
expansion by building a powerful bulwark in Western Europe, anchored
on West Germany.
Not s u rprisingly, the Soviets viewed the American decision about
Germany's future with utter alarm. As Melvyn Leffler notes, "Nothing, of
course, agitated the Kremlin more than Anglo-American initiatives in
western Germany. The specter of west German self-government horrified
the Russians, as did the prospect of German integration into a Western
economic bloc." 1 38 In response, the Soviets facilitated a communist coup
in Czechoslovakia in February 1 948 and made that country pan of their
own bulwark against the West. More imponant, the Soviets staned a
maj or crisis in late June 1 948 by blockading Berlin, closing the roads and
waterways that connected it with the Western occupation zones in
Germany.
The United S tates responded quickly and forcefully to these Soviet
actions. In the wake of the coup in Czechoslovakia, the United States
began thinking seriously about creating a Western military alliance to
deter a future S oviet military threat against Western Europe. n9 Planning
began in earnest in May 1 948 and eventually led to the creation of NATO
on April 4, l 949 . 1 40 Although many in the West thought that B erlin was
a strategic liability and should be abandoned, the United States initiated
a maj o r airlift of supplies into the beleaguered city. 14 1 Recognizing that
the United States had trumped them, the Soviets lilted the blockade in
May 1 94 9 .
Stalin a l s o p u s h e d to expand Soviet influence in Nonheast Asia during
the early Cold War. '" The Soviets had promised during World War II to
pull their troops out of Manchuria by February I, 1 946, but they were still
there when that date arrived. The United States protested and the Soviet
)26 T H E T R A G E D Y OP G R E A T P O W E R P O L I T I C S
army was withdrawn b y early May 1 946. American policymakers were
also deeply concerned that Mao Zedong's Communists might defeat
Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists in their long-running civil war and make
China an ally of the Soviet Union. Mao and Stalin had complicated relations.
but the Soviets were providing modest assistance to the Chinese
Communists. The United States, for its pan, provided limited aid to the
Nationalists. The United States could do little, however, to rescue Chiang's
forces from their ultimate defeat in 1 949, because they were so corrupt
and inefficient. Secretary of State Dean Acheson put the point well in his
July 30, 1 949, letter transmitting the State Department's famous .. White
Paper" on China to President Truman: .. Nothing that this country did or
could have done within the reasonable limits of its capabilities could have
changed that result; nothing that was left undone by this country has contributed
to it. It was the product of internal Chinese forces which this
country tried to influence but could not . " 143
North Korea's invasion of South Korea on June 25, 1 9 50, was widely
believed at the time to have been approved and supported by Stalin. The
Truman administration reacted immediately to the attack and fought a
three-year war against North Korea and China to restore the status quo
ante. One consequence of the conflict was that the United States kept a
substantial number of troops in South Korea for the remainder of the
Cold War. But more important, the Korean War caused the United States
to substantially increase defense spending and become even more vigilant
in its efforts to contain the Soviet Union. The United States built formidable
deterrent structures in Europe. Northeast Asia, and the Persian Gulf
that kept the Soviets at bay in those critically important areas from 1 9 50
until 1 990. The only places that the Soviets could expand during those
four decades were in the Third World. where not only were the gains
dubious, but the United States met the Soviets at every tum. 144
Nevertheless, the American impulse to buck-pass never completely disappeared
during the Cold War. 145 For example, to secure Senate approval
for the NATO treaty in 1 949, Acheson had to emphasize that the United
States had no intention of sending large military forces to E u rope on a
permanent basis. Throughout the 1 9 5 0s, President Dwight Eisenhower
Balancln9 versus Buck-PaHln9 327
was seriously interested in bringing American forces home and forcing the
Western Europeans to defend themselves against the Soviet threat. I'"'
Indeed, this impulse explains the forceful U.S. suppon for European integration
in the early Cold War. Furthermore, there was strong sentiment in
the U . S . Senate in the late 1 960s and early 1 970s to reduce, if not eliminate,
America's continental commitment. Even during the presidency of
Ronald Reagan, influential voices called for significant reductions in
American troop levels in Europe. 1 41 But buck-passing was not a serious
option for the United States in the bipolar world that existed between
1 94 5 and 1 990. From the end of World War II until the end of the Cold
War, the United States pursued a tough-minded balancing policy against
the Soviet Union that achieved remarkable success.
The C a l c u l u s of Power
A brief look at the distribution of power in the wake of World War II shows
dearly that no great power or combination of great powers existed in either
Europe or Nonheast Asia that could prevent the Soviet army from overruning
those regions, and therefore the United States had no choice but to
check Soviet expansion. In Northeast Asia, Japan was disarmed and devastated.
while China, which had little potential power to stan with, was in the
midst of a brutal civil war. In Europe. Germany had just been decisively
defeated by the Soviet army and was in ruins. It certainly was in no position
to build a n army in the foreseeable future. Italy's army was wrecked and
not likely to recover anytime soon; even when it was intact. it was among
the most incompetent fighting forces in modem European history. France
had been knocked out of the war in 1 940 and then plundered by Germany
u ntil the late summer of 1 944, when it was finally liberated by the
American and British armies. France had a tiny army when the war ended
in the spring of 1 94 5 , but it was in no position..,ither economically or
politically-to build a mass army as it had before 1 940.143 The United
Kingdom built a substantial army in World War II, and it played an important
role in defeating the Wehrmacht. But it is apparent on close inspection
that the United Kingdom did not have the economic and military where328
T H I T R A G I D Y OF G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
withal after 1 945 t o lead a balancing coalition against the Soviet Union.
Only the United States was powerful enough to assume that demanding
task.
From the relative size of the American, British, and Soviet military
establishments in World War n we can see why the United Kingdom was
not in the same league as the Soviet Union and the United States.
Between 1 939 and 1 945, the United Kingdom mobilized about 5.9 million
troops, the United States mobilized roughly 14 million, and the Soviet
Union mobilized approximately 22.4 million. 149 When World War II ended
in 1 945, the United Kingdom had about 4. 7 million troops under arms,
the Americans had roughly 12 million, and the Soviets had about 1 2 . 5
million. 1 50 Regarding army size, the United Kingdom raised 5 0 divisions
over the course of World War II, while the United States raised 90 divisions.
The Soviets raised 550 divisions, although they were somewhat
smaller than American and British divisions. 1 5 1
Of course. all three military establishments shrunk quite drastically in
size after World War II. But the United Kingdom was still no match for the
Soviet Union. The Soviets had 2 . 8 7 million men under arms in 1 948,
whereas the United Kingdom had only 847,000. The United States figure
for that year was l . 36 million. 1 52 Funhennore, both the American and the
Soviet military establishments grew significantly in size after 1 948, while
the British military shrunk in size. 1 51 The United Kingdom's economy was
so weak in early 1 947, as we saw earlier, that it could not provide aid to
Greece and Turkey, prompting the United States to promulgate the
Truman Doctrine. The United Kingdom was cenainly in n o position to
defend Western Europe from the Soviet army.
The United Kingdom's problem was not a failure to recognize the
Soviet threat, or a lack of will to contain it. O n the contrary, B ritish leaders
were just as gung-ho as their American counterpans about thwaning
Soviet expansion. ' " But the B ritish simply did not have sufficient material
resources to compete with the Soviets. In 1 9 50, for example, the Soviet
Union had a gross national product (GNP) of $ 1 2 6 billion, and it spent
$ 1 5. 5b illion on defense. The United Kingdom had a GNP of $ 7 1 billion
and spent $ 2 . 3 billion on defense. "' To make matters worse, the United
Balancing versus Buck-PaHing )29
Kingdom still possessed a far-flung empire that demanded a large percentage
of its precious defense dollars. Not surprisingly, British leaders understood
from the beginning of the Cold War that the West would need Uncle
Sam to organize and direct the containment of the Soviet Union.
C O N C L U S I O N
Having analyzed each case i n detail, let me now step back and summarize
the results. Offensive realism predicts that states will be
acutely sensitive to the balance of power and will look for opportunities to
increase their own power or weaken rivals. In practical terms, this means
that states will adopt diplomatic strategies that reflect the opportunities
and constraints created by the particular distribution of power.
Specifically, the theory predicts that a threatened state is likely to balance
promptly and efficiently in bipolarity, because neither buck-passing nor
great-power balancing coalitions are feasible when there are only two
great powers in the system. The Cold War case appears to support that
claim. The Soviet Union emerged from World War II as by far the most
powerful state in Europe (and Northeast Asia ) , and only the United States
was capable of containing it.
When confronted with potential European hegemons earlier in the
century-Wilhelmine Germany and Nazi Germany-the initial U . S . reaction
had been to pass the buck to the other European great powers-the
United Kingdom, France, and Russia. But buck-passing was not an option
in the Cold War, because there was no great power in Europe that could
contain the Soviet Union. So right after World War II ended, the United
States moved quickly and forcefully to balance against the Soviet threat,
and it stayed the course until the Cold War ended in 1 990. Nevertheless,
the American impulse to buck-pass was evident throughout the period .
Regarding multipolarity, t h e theory predicts t h a t buck-passing is most
likely in the absence of a potential hegemon but still likely to occur even
when there is an especially powerful state in the system . The evidence
appears to bear out these claims. Among the four multipolar cases,
JJO T H E T R A G I D Y Of G R E AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
Bismarck's Prussia was the only aggressor that was not a potential hegemon.
France probably had the most powerful army in Europe between
1 862 and 1 866, while Prussia was number one from 1 867 to 1 870. But
neither threatened to overrun the continent. As my theory would predict,
buck-passing was more widespread here than in any of the cases involving
a potential European hegemon. Indeed, no balancing coalition-not
even one limited to two states-formed against Prussia while it was winning
three wars over an eight-year period. The United Kingdom and
Russia actually welcomed Bismarck's efforts to create a unified Germany,
which they hoped would serve them in the future as a buck-catcher! The
Prussian army directly threatened both Austria and France, making them
likely candidates to balance together against Prussia. But they buck-passed
instead, allowing Bismarck's army to clobber Austria's in 1 866 while
France looked on. and then to clobber France's army in 1 870 while
Austria looked on.
Balancing coalitions did form against the potential hegemons:
Napoleonic France. Wilhelmine Germany, and Nazi Germany. Still buckpassing
was tried in each case, albeit with significant variations. According
to my theory. the balance of power and geography should explain the differences
among these cases. Specifically, the more relative power the
aspiring hegemon controls, the less likely we are to see buck-passing;
common borders are also likely to discourage buck-passing. These arguments
appear to account for the different patterns of buck-passing in these
three cases of unbalanced multipolarity.
We see the least amount of buck-passing against Wilhelmine Germany.
The Triple Entente, which included the United Kingdom, France, and
Russia and which was designed to contain Germany, was largely in place
by 1 907, some seven years before World War I broke out. France and
Russia actually formed the first leg of that balancing alliance in the early
I 890s, about twenty years before the crisis that sparked World War I. The
United Kingdom, although it initially passed the buck to France and
Russia, joined the coalition between 1 90 5 and 1 90 7 . Power calculations
largely account for the formation of the Triple Entente. Germany had an
imposing army in the early 1 890s, which forced France and Russia to ally.
Balancing versus Buck-Pa11in9 331
But Germany was not yet a potential hegemon, and the French and
Russian armies together seemed capable of containing the German army.
So the United Kingdom was able to remain on the sidelines. But that all
changed in the first five years of the twentieth century, when Germany
became a potential hegemon ( 1 90 3 ) and Russia was dealt a devastating
defeat by Japan ( 1 904- 5 ) . In response, the United Kingdom stopped
buck-passing and the Triple Entente came into being.
Much more buck-passing arose against Nazi Germany than there had
been against Wilhelmine Germany. Hitler came to power in January 1 9 3 3
a n d almost immediately began building a powerful military. The Third
Reich's main rivals-the United Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Unionnever
formed a balancing coalition against Nazi Germany. In fact, all three
pursued buck-passing strategies during the 1 9 30s. Not until March 1 9 39
did the United Kingdom and France come together to oppose Hitler.
Nevertheless, the Soviets continued to buck-pass. When the Wehrmacht
knocked France out of the war in the spring of 1 940, leaving the British to
fight alone against the Nazi war machine, Stalin worked to foster a long
war between the United Kingdom and Germany while he remained on
the sidelines. Operation Barbarossa in the summer of 1 94 1 finally brought
the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union together, and the United States
joined the Anglo- Soviet coalition in December 1 94 1 . That alliance hung
together for the next three and a half years to defeat the Third Reich .
All that buck-passing in the 1 9 30s was due in good part to the fact that
Germany did not possess a formidable army until 1 9 39, and thus no compelling
reason drew Hitler's foes together before then. When Nazi
Germany became a potential hegemon in 1 9 39, the United Kingdom and
France formed an alliance, mainly because the British recognized that
France alone was no match for the Wehrmacht. Yet neither the B ritish
nor the French formed an alliance with the Soviet Union, mainly because
the S oviet Union was much more powerful than Russia had been before
l 9 1 4; the Soviets stood a good chance of surviving without help from the
United Kingdom and France. After the fall of France. Stalin refused to join
forces with the United Kingdom against the Third Reich because he
thought that the stopping power of water would make it difficult for
)12 T H I T R A G I D Y OP G R I AT P O W I R P O L I T I C S
Germany t o defeat the United Kingdom quickly and decisively, thus guaranteeing
a long war between them that would work to the Soviets'
advantage.
Buck-passing was most prevalent in the case of Revolutionary and
Napoleonic France, which faced four rival great powers: Austria, Britain,
Prussia, and Russia. France actually did not become a potential hegemon
until 1 793, a year after war broke out. France's rivals passed the buck constantly
between 1 793 and 1 804, mainly because France was not yet so
powerful that all of its rivals would have to act in tandem to prevent it
from overrunning the continent. By 1 805, however, Napoleon had an
army in place that threatened to make France Europe's first hegemon. But
before all of Napoleon's rivals could form a unified balancing coalition, he
knocked Austria and Prussia out of the balance of power and forced
Russia to quit fighting and sign a peace treaty. Inefficient balancing, commonplace
in multipola rity, allowed Napoleon to win a series of stunning
victories between 1 80 5 and 1 809 that gave him control of much of
Europe. France's rivals got a reprieve in late 1 8 1 2 , when Napoleon suffered
a major defeat in Russia. This time they balanced efficiently and
decisively defeated France between 1 8 1 3 and 1 8 1 5 .
Geography also worked to discourage buck-passing against Wilhelmine
Germany but to encourage it against Nazi Germany and Napoleonic
France. The United Kingdom fought against all three potential hegemons,
but it was separated from each of them by the English Channel. Thus,
there is no variation in geography across the B ritish cases, so they can be
left out of the analysis. The situation on the continent, however, varies
markedly among the three cases. Wilhelmine Germany shared a lengthy
border with both France and Russia, which made it difficult for either to
buck-pass and easy for them to form a balancing coalition, since both
were well-positioned to strike directly into Germany. France shared a
common border with Nazi Germany, but the Soviet Union was separated
from the Third Reich for most of the 1 9 30s by minor powers such as
Poland. This buffer zone encouraged buck-passing and made it difficult for
France and the Soviet Union to form a balancing coalition to contain
Germany. Although the map of Europe changed frequently between 1 792
Balancln9 v?raua Buck-Paaaln9 333
and 1 8 1 5, Napoleon's rivals often had no common border with France, a
situation that facilitated buck-passing and complicated the formation of an
effective balancing alliance.
In sum, both geography and the distribution of power play a key role in
determining whether threatened great powers form balancing coalitions
or buck-pass against dangerous aggressors. The next chapter will switch
gears and look at how aggressors behave. focusing on when they are likely
to initiate a war with another state. As will become apparent. the distribution
of power is also important for explaining the outbreak of
great-power war.